WASHINGTON _ The U.S. Embassy in El Salvador, heavily damaged by the Oct. 10 earthquake, is sinking into its underground parking lot at the rate of half an inch a day and will have to be replaced at a cost of $70 million, says Ronald Spiers, undersecretary of state for management     ``It's a total loss,'' Spiers told reporters last week on the plane bringing him and Secretary of State George Shultz back from a one-day visit to inspect the damage in the Salvadoran capital. ``I have no idea how we're going to demolish it.''     The huge, squat building, repeatedly reinforced since its construction in 1966, began to symbolize the embattled U.S. presence in El Salvador during the early 1980s, when death squads and leftist guerrillas terrorized the capital and embassy personnel traveled in armored vehicles accompanied by armed guards.     Encircled by an 8-foot wall and draped with metal netting to repel grenades, the pillbox structure has lasted through several quakes along the secondary fault line that runs directly under it.     Last week it showed few signs of the structural damage that has spelled the end of its usefulness. But Spiers said the quake cut through two of the building's main supporting pillars and cracked another two, and the main beams are sagging.     Since the quake, embassy operations have been based in the residence of Ambassador Edwin Corr.     Embassy personnel who rushed to safety when the quake hit have been ordered to stay out of the building for fear it might collapse during an aftershock. About 1,300 aftershocks rocked San Salvador in the week after the main tremor.     ``I went all the way up to the top, and I tell you it was scary,'' Spiers said. ``People are afraid to take the files out because the weight might shift.''     Spiers, who oversees the department's $1.1 billion effort to upgrade security at U.S. embassies worldwide, said the Salvadoran facility ``was not high on my agenda'' before the quake, but ``it is now.''     Land for a new building will be purchased away from the center of town, in accordance with security guidelines being used worldwide, but the city block the current building now occupies will have to be cleared in some way.     ``Maybe a good aftershock will do it and save me the trouble,'' Spiers said.
