From seven to 10 Seattle-area residents are preparing to leave for El Salvador tomorrow to assist in earthquake relief efforts.     The Rev. Donovan Cook, the University Baptist Church pastor who is coordinating the effort here, said the group includes those trained in emergency medical aid and will work through the Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Salvador.     ``The response from this community has been outstanding,'' Cook said, noting that volunteers staffed the church's phones all day yesterday fielding offers of assistance.     Offers of help have also been received at the Red Cross office in Seattle. Spokeswoman Hope Tuttle said a plane chartered by the International League of Red Cross Societies yesterday delivered 13 tons of blankets, tents and first-aid equipment into the quake-stricken area.     Cook said he wasn't sure exactly how many people from the Seattle area would make the trip to El Salvador but that passport and visa arrangements were being made for as many as 10 volunteers, who will fly to Los Angeles to join other volunteers from Arizona and the San Francisco area.     The flight from Los Angeles to San Salvador is being arranged by Medical Air Lift for El Salvador, a nationwide group that has been gathering medical supplies for months and whose chief spokesman is actor Ed Asner.     Cook said one of his church members, Jennifer Casolo, was in San Salvador at the time of the earthquake but was unhurt. He said a Salvadoran Baptist Association building near the U.S. Embassy was leveled, but no one was injured there.     Tuttle said those wishing to donate to the relief effort can make their checks out to the American Red Cross and send them to the agency's Seattle office, P.O. Box 24286, Seattle 98124. ``El Salvador Earthquake'' should be written on the lower left corner of the checks, she said.     She said the U.S. State Department is maintaining a special telephone line, 202-647-6610, to provide information on the status of U.S. citizens in El Salvador.
