SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador _ The weakened administration of President Jose Napoleon Duarte may not be equipped to deal with the political fallout from the disastrous Oct. 10 earthquake, government officials say     ``It could not have come at a worse time,'' Julio Rey Prendes, minister of communications and a close Duarte adviser, said yesterday. ``We are a poor, wounded country, already facing the crisis of a fratricidal war and economic crisis, and now this.''     Government officials insisted they would not repeat the mistakes of the Anastasio Somoza dictatorship in Nicaragua after a devastating earthquake in 1972, when the now-ruling Sandinistas used the mishandling and theft of international aid to build a following among quake victims.     The U.S. Congress has approved $50 million in immediate assistance to El Salvador.     In an effort to quiet some of the administration's most virulent critics, Duarte named a businessmen's committee to oversee aid sent from other countries.     ``It's a shame a catastrophe had to bring us together,'' said Ricardo Hill, vice president of the National Salvadoran Private Enterprise Association.     El Salvador, which has lost $1.5 billion in destroyed facilities and lost production since the start of the 7-year-old civil war, now faces an estimated $2 billion in damage caused by the quake.     A recent survey commissioned by Duarte's Christian Democratic Party showed party support eroding. About 40 percent of those who responded said they had no party preference or were disenchanted with democracy. Eighty percent said they believed the economy was hopeless.     Immediately after the quake, the guerrillas announced the start of a unilateral cease-fire, which the government rejected as a propaganda ploy. The guerrillas already have begun to criticize the distribution of aid.     ``The businessmen, Duarte's followers and the colonels are stealing the aid, which arrives from our brother countries,'' said one recent rebel statement. ``This is why hundreds of families suffering from the disaster have not received assistance.'Caption:  PHOTOJOSE NAPOLEON DUARTE
