SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador _ Workers clawing through tons of earthquake rubble yesterday rescued a person who survived five days entombed in a collapsed office complex.     ``You can't say there are no survivors _ in Mexico City they found people alive after eight days,'' said Marcel Chevrolet, a member of a Swiss rescue team, referring to the September 1985 quake that ravaged the Mexican capital. ``But time is running against them.''     President Jose Napoleon Duarte announced the survivor's rescue during a nationally televised address, but did not identify the person or give details other than to say the dramatic discovery occurred at the ruins of the Ruben Dario building, five blocks from the presidential palace. More than 150 people have been rescued from the complex since Friday.     Duarte didn't provide any new casualty figures last night. The official toll still stands at 982 dead, more than 8,000 injured and from 200,000 to 300,000 homeless. The Roman Catholic Archdiocese of San Salvador says as many as 30,000 were injured.     Duarte said he will ask U.S. Secretary of State George Shultz _ who arrived in El Salvador today _ to help win a $50 million emergency U.S. aid package being considered by Congress. Duarte said it would be part of a target of $1 billion in international aid to rebuild San Salvador.     The Soviet Union announced yesterday it, too, would be sending emergency aid.     Meanwhile, two Seattle-area doctors, a registered nurse, a clergyman and medical supplies arrived last night as part of the first Northwest-based mercy mission to San Salvador.     The team is composed of Dr. Jim Taylor, Dr. Nancy Snapp, registered nurse Mike Stern and the Rev. Jamie Mock-Robbins from University Baptist Church. A third physician, Dr. Joe Rintz from Eugene, Ore., will take medical supplies from Oregon and join the team Sunday.     The Seattle-King County Chapter of the American Red Cross is accepting contributions for El Salvador relief. Checks should be earmarked ``El Salvador Relief'' and addressed to P.O. Box 24286, Seattle, WA 98124.    Compiled from Associated Press, Reuters and Seattle Times staff.
