MEXICO CITY _ Beginning at exactly 7:19 a.m. one year ago today, Mexico City changed forever.     For three minutes the most destructive temblor in the city's 660-year history hit. It qualified for ``great earthquake'' status, registering 8.1 on the Richter scale.     But the terror wasn't over. The next evening, an aftershock nearly as powerful as the first _ 7.8 on the Richter scale _ rumbled through the city. It knocked down what the previous quake had only left leaning.     Between them, the two quakes destroyed or badly damaged 5,000 buildings, which contained at least 30,000 homes or apartments. They left another 60,000 residences in sad repair. They put about 100,000 families _ an estimated 500,000 individuals _ into the street.     The number of people who were killed may never be known.     The government at various times put the official death toll between 6,000 and 9,500. Unofficial figures run between 20,000 and 30,000. Many of the bodies will forever lie unidentified.     The quake affected a relatively narrow swath of this 575-square-mile metropolis of 18 million chilangos, as the inhabitants of the world's most populous city are called. But what it did hit was costly. Total damages have been put at between $4.5 billion and $5 billion.     A recent report from the office of President Miguel de la Madrid estimated that the cataclysm tore a hole in the economy amounting to 2.7 percent of the gross national product, the value of all goods and services produced.     A year later, Mexico City is still struggling to recover from the economic devastation, from the broken dreams, from the nightmares. It is doing well on some fronts, not so well on others.     The worst of the destruction _ the mountains of dusty rubble, the skeletons of apartment buildings, the stench of the dead _ has since been cleared and sanitized. What was left of well-known hotels such as the Continental and Regis and two or three others has been razed.     One of the oddities of the quake, due to the city's Jell-O-like subsoil and the physics of vibration, is that buildings taller than 15 stories fared well. Below that height, especially between eight and 15 stories, even concrete structures tended to fall.     Some positive things may emerge from the disaster: better building codes; more evenly spread-out public hospitals, a chance to bring under control the urban monster called Mexico City.     But the healing of the wounded city has been slow. Little, if anything, has been done to scores of shaken buildings. Broken windows stare vacantly; chunks of concrete still hang from steel support rods. High-rise offices, twisted metal hanging from their ceilings, remain empty.     Metal doors close off some shops, and padlocks hang from others. Shops that have reopened report fewer customers. The presidential report says small industry lost 1,326 establishments in the quakes.     Then there are the ``street people,'' who are not so by choice.     According to government figures, 5,000 displaced families have been moved into new homes. But more than 86,000 chilangos are still in temporary housing _ much of it metal and asbestos sheds that snake down the middle of thoroughfares or fill small streets.     The government's main effort to remedy that is a program under which 28,302 housing units are being torn down and rebuilt and 16,135 other units repaired. Residents of buildings that are replaced may buy 430-square-foot units for about $4,000, payable in monthly installments of about $30.     There's a hitch, though. Many of those who lost their pre-quake tenements used to pay less than $1 a month in rent; some paid only a few cents. So many cannot afford the program.     One benefit of the quake may be decentralized health care. When the temblors toppled the Benito Juarez Hospital, the National Medical Center and the Social Security Hospital, the country lost 30 percent of its hospital capacity in three minutes _ 5,626 of the 17,931 beds in the public health system.     Many of the new public medical centers that are being built under the government's National Reconstruction Fund will go up in the northern part of the city, where an estimated 3.5 million people live. Before the quake there were only 425 public hospital beds in northern colonias or neighborhoods, compared with more than 5,000 downtown.     But what is being done to avoid a repeat of last September's havoc? Plenty, say city officials.     For one thing, they say, Mexico City will institute a revised building code that may split the metropolis into several earthquake zones _ rather than the present three _ with varying standards in each, a zoning that would affect almost every aspect of construction and structural repair.     Weeks after the killer quakes the cry went up that now there was a chance to cure the macrocephaly of the city _ decentralize the federal bureaucracy and encourage some of the area's 130,000 industries to move to other parts of the nation.     But one year later, some fear the opportunity has been lost.     When President de la Madrid came to office in 1982 he announced his intention to shift the center of power away from the capital. The earthquakes, leveling federal buildings and factories, gave him a chance to turn rhetoric into action.     There was action, at first. The government refused to allow destroyed factories _ mostly small textile plants _ to rebuild inside the city. It also moved several of its agencies to smaller cities. Then the program slowed.     Officials said they needed time to make long-range plans. Others said the government ran out of enthusiasm.     Seismologists say the government is almost sure to get another chance in a few decades.     Mexico, they point out, sits on the Earth's crust on the American Plate, near several major faults where the heavier Cocos Plate under the Pacific is pushing eastward two to five inches yearly, building up tension between the tectonic plates that is released in sudden earth movements.     Data show that last Sept. 19, the Cocos Plate suddenly shifted 12 miles down and two yards eastward along a 120-mile fault in the ocean.     Such major quakes occur about every 35 years in Mexico, the seismologists say.     Compiled from Associated Press, United Press International, Knight-Ridder Newspapers and Dallas Morning News.Caption:  PHOTOUPI / REUTERS: DR. LUIS ARTURO CHAVEZ HOLDS YOUNG FRANCISCO RODRIGUEZ DURING A CHECKUP. CHAVEZ RESCUED THE YOUNGSTER FROM THE RUBBLE OF MEXICO CITY'S GENERAL HOSPITAL LAST SEPT. 23. THE BABY'S MOTHER DIED WHENTHE HOSPITAL COLLAPSED
