VALDEZ, Alaska _ It was 5:36 p.m., March 27, 1964 _ Good Friday.      An Alaska Steamship Co. freighter, the Chena, was unloading in Valdez harbor. A civic club was making plans for an Easter Egg hunt the next morning. Winter snow finally was melting from the streets.      Suddenly, the ground began to tremble. And then it began to heave with a terrible rolling motion.      Earthquake.      A massive submarine landslide sucked the city dock and all who were standing on it into the bay. The Chena was twirled like a cork before breaking free. Giant tidal waves rose up and smashed the town.      The death toll in Valdez was 32, twice that of any other Alaskan community hit by the most powerful earthquake in America's history. Structural damage in Valdez was estimated at 90 percent. The epicenter of the quake was only 45 miles west of the town.      But Valdez refused to die.      ``Damned if we're going to be run out by an earthquake,'' said Owen Meals, a Valdez pioneer.      The whole town moved four miles west, to solid bedrock, and built anew.      A year later the National Municipal League named the new Valdez an ``All-America City'' because of the courage of its citizens.      Meanwhile, a drama that would change Alaska's fortunes was unfolding at Prudhoe Bay, on Alaska's North Slope, 800 miles from Valdez. A great Arctic oilfield had been discovered. A pipeline would be needed to get the oil to market.      Valdez business leaders convinced the oil companies that the tanker terminal for the pipeline system should be built here. The first oil reached the port of Valdez in July, 1977.      Meanwhile, Valdez residents voted overwhelmingly to bond themselves for construction of a $48 million floating dock that can handle the world's largest cargo vessels.      Again, ``All-America City'' honors were conferred.      Today Valdez (say Val-DEEZ), pop. 3,700, is a growing hub for Prince William Sound's visitor industry.      Most visitors reach Valdez, from Anchorage or Fairbanks, by way of the Richardson Highway, Alaska's first highway, which began as a gold-rush trail in 1898. Others travel here by Alaska ferries, by air and aboard occasional cruise ships.      Valdez has what none of the other Prince William Sound communities has _ a highway link to the rest of Alaska. Anchorage is 304 highway miles (only 115 air miles) away; Fairbanks is 368 highway miles to the north.      Valdez also has something no other Alaskan port has _ a new designation as Alaska's first foreign trade zone. That means foreign goods _ everything from radar for fishing vessels to oilfield equipment _ can be brought here duty-free and quota-free for transshipment to American markets.      ``We have more going for us now than we ever did in the old days,'' Dorothy Clifton says.      Clifton, 69, the city's historian, rode out the Good Friday earthquake. And it was Clifton, then as Valdez's magistrate, who salvaged the silt-stained records of Old Valdez and set up the records system for the new city.      She was determined that the history of Valdez (the first incorporated town in south-central Alaska) be preserved. The result is Archives Alive, a repository of old newspapers, books and historical photos open free to visitors in downtown Valdez.      ``"Call me any time and I'll open the place,'' she says. ``It's never too late or too early.'' (Phone 835-4367 or 835-4377, when you're in town).    ``Our job is to tell about the true happenings, to fight against mythology and misinformation. Really, the true things are much more interesting than the stories people invent.''      Well, it's true that Valdez was founded on gold. And it is true that the first route to the goldfields was over the dangerous crevasses of Valdez Glacier, just behind Old Valdez. Sometimes unlucky stampeders fell into icy tombs.      They tell the story here of one victim who tumbled into a crevasse and was too far down in the ice to be rescued. He asked that a bottle of spirits be lowered so that he might drink a toast to the success of his fellow gold-seekers.      True or false? There's just no way of telling.      But there is no doubt about the amazing resurrection of plucky Valdez after Good Friday 1964. Owen Meals, the pioneer who led efforts to build the new city, is gone now. But the new Valdez he hoped for lives.       If Valdez had no visitor attractions _ and it has a bunch _ travelers still would come here for the scenery. With the icy peaks of the Chugach Mountains rising right behind the city from the deep fiord called Valdez Arm, and circled by gleaming glaciers and lofty waterfalls, Valdez long has billed itself (a bit boldly) as ``the Switzerland of Alaska.''      Valdez doesn't have alpine meadows with the music of cow bells. But, then, Switzerland doesn't have a sea.      Here are some of the things Valdez does have for its visitors:    -- Columbia Glacier: 35 miles by excursion vessels southwest of Valdez, the top attraction in Prince William Sound. Glacier trips can be reserved in advance or arranged when travelers arrive. Boat trips also are available to Shoup Glacier, only seven miles west of Valdez.    -- The trans-Alaska oil pipeline tanker terminal: across the bay from the city. Only visitors on guided motorcoach tours are permitted on the grounds. Gray Line of Alaska operates the tours from Valdez, for $19 a person. If you are on your own, drive to the visitor center at the entrance for information about the $1.4 billion marine terminal where the pipeline ends and the southbound tankers are loaded with Arctic crude oil. There are good photo opportunities when the Columbia Glacier excursion vessels sail close to the terminal.    -- Salmon fishing: rated ``outstanding'' by anglers. The annual Valdez Silver Salmon Derby, in July and August, offers big cash prizes. You don't have to run far for the fishing; often the best fishing is right in the bay. Charter-boat operators charge an average of $500 a day for the boat, with six or so customers splitting the fee. Sometimes half-day fishing trips can be arranged, costing an average of $250 for the boat.    -- Salmon hatcheries: The Solomon Gulch Hatchery, on the way to the pipeline terminal, has a walking tour with a video introduction. The Crooked Creek Hatchery, at the Richardson Highway entrance to Valdez, has a viewing platform for close-up viewing of spawning salmon. No charge at either hatchery.    -- Valdez Heritage Center: Valdez's museum, downtown, at the corner of Egan Drive and Chenega Street. Exhibits from pioneer times, including artifacts from Old Valdez. No admission fee, but donations are welcome.    -- Keystone Canyon: 13 miles from Valdez by the Richardson Highway. Site of a gunfire showdown in 1907 when forces in Valdez and the Cordova area were competing for a railroad route to the copper mines in the interior. Nearby are two spectacular waterfalls, Bridal Veil and Horsetail.    -- Mineral Creek Stamp Mill: a relic from gold-mining days here, built in 1913. A rough road leads for about seven miles from the end of Hazelet Street. Best to stop when the going gets too rugged and hike the rest of the way. The canyon is decked with waterfalls and wildflowers.    -- Other activities in the Valdez area: river rafting, kayaking, hiking, camping.    -- Accommodations: Valdez has five hotel-motels and 16 bed-and-breakfast operations. B&B rates range from $45 to $75 a night. There also are two camper parks, with prices ranging from about $8 to $15 a night.    -- Dining: something for every budget, from the Pizza Palace to fine dining in the Westmark Valdez hotel.    -- Weather: Like the rest of Prince William Sound, Valdez has mild summer weather. July days, for example, average 61 degrees high, 46 degrees low. Pack a jacket.    -- Additional information: Valdez Convention and Tourist Bureau, P.O. Box 1603, Valdez, AK 99686; phone 1-907-835-2984Caption:  PHOTOSTANTON H. PATTY / SEATTLE TIMES: PRINCE WILLIAM SOUND SALMON SEINERS HAUL THEIR NET NEAR VALDEZ
