Home away from home: Defeated Polish presidential candidate Stanislaw Tyminski and his wife, Graciela, arrive yesterday in Toronto, where they also have residency. Before leaving Poland, Tyminski posted a $100,000 bond to ensure he would return to answer charges of slandering the outgoing prime minister    Quake kills at least 13;    Sicilians take to streets      An earthquake struck Sicily's eastern coast early today, killing at least 13 people, collapsing several buildings and sending thousands of panicked residents into the streets, officials said. Two of the victims died of heart attacks after the quake, which registered 4.7 on the Richter scale. At least 200 injuries were reported. Rescue crews were digging people out of collapsed buildings in a driving rain and making inspections in towns hit hardest by the quake. The quake caused at least $400 million in damage, according to one official.    ALBANIAN TROOPS SENT IN: Soldiers were rushed into action in hard-line Communist Albania today to quell an attack on officials and buildings by ``hooligans'' armed with stones and iron bars, official media reported. The attack in the northern city of Shkodra came a day after a peaceful rally by thousands of people in the capital, Tirana, founded the country's first non-Communist party, the Democratic Party of Albania.    ISRAELI COLONEL GUILTY: An Israeli military court today found a colonel, Col. Yaacov Sadeh, guilty of causing the death by negligence of a Palestinian teen-ager during a clash with Arab stone-throwers 17 months ago, military sources said.    CANADA-TAIWAN TIE ANGERS CHINA: China today criticized Canada for approving the opening of air links with Taiwan and hinted it may retaliate. A foreign-ministry spokesman said Canada's approval to an airline to fly to Taiwan infringed on China's sovereignty. Direct flights between Taipei and Vancouver started since Dec. 5.    CURFEW IN SOVIET ENCLAVE: The republic of Georgia has imposed a curfew and other state-of-emergency restrictions on a small separatist enclave where violence broke out after Georgia abolished the enclave's autonomy Tuesday, it was reported today. A news report said the clampdown in South Ossetia last night followed three fatal shootings earlier in the day.    AQUINO CREATES POLICE FORCE: Philippines President Corazon Aquino today set up a separate police force free of military control, a step she described as removing the apparatus that bolstered the late President Ferdinand Marcos. The law creates a 120,000-strong force by merging police units and the paramilitary Philippine Constabulary.    ANGOLA REBEL MEETS BUSH: Jonas Savimbi, head of the U.S.-backed rebel forces in Angola, met with President Bush today and said he expected that a cease-fire ending his nation's 15-year civil war would be reached by early 1991.    MOBIL OIL HIT BY PERU REBELS: Mobil Oil Corp. has suspended its search for oil in Peru's jungle after an attack by leftist rebels destroyed a surveying camp it had operated. The attack this week was the most serious against Peru's oil industry in 10 years, as well as the largest ever against a foreign company in Peru.    FOOD NEEDED IN ETHIOPIA: The United Nations issued a world appeal today for a million tons of food aid to Ethiopia to help prevent another famine. Drought has led to crop failure throughout most of Eritrea and parts of Tigray. Famine killed an estimated one million people in 1984-85.    Times news serviceCaption:  PHOTOAP:
