ANCHORAGE - Twenty-seven years after the devastating 1964 Good Friday earthquake in Alaska, experts say most Alaskans are not prepared for the destruction that another big one could bring.     The 1964 quake measured 8.4 on the Richter scale. It sent 80-foot seismic waves called tsunamis hurtling through the Gulf of Alaska as far south as Oregon. The earthquake and tsunamis killed more than 130 people and caused more than $300 million in damage.     Today, in what many seismologists regard as the earthquake capital of North America, earthquakes often are the center of conversations. A quake measuring 6 on the Richter scale two weeks ago again grabbed Alaskans' attention - for a few days.     Since 1964, state officials have done a lot in the area of earthquake response, quake experts say. The state Division of Emergency Services has an earthquake response plan, and it works with the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) to update response measures.     But officials are worried that not enough is being done.     The state emergency services division earthquake planning staff consists of one person - compared to 26 in California. Preparedness programs vary from city to city and school to school.     Buildings in the largest urban centers in Alaska probably are more able to withstand earthquakes than in 1964. But there are so many more buildings - many of them tall and framed in glass - that the potential hazards have grown, officials said.priority."     Future Alaska earthquakes could be larger and more damaging, said John Davies, state seismologist.     Although state emergency management officials have done a lot in recent years to respond to an earthquake and other emergencies after they happen, not enough has been done to mitigate, or reduce, potential damage before it occurs, Davies said.     Proposed legislation that would make schools throughout the state uniformly train students about quake threats and evacuation procedures, and enforce structural requirements, has languished in Juneau, Martin said.     And no one really knows what kind of panic or problems might result from crippling damage to city, police or business computers, telephone lines and other critical communications or transportation networks, Martin and Davies said.     "The bottom line is there's a kind of patchwork situation in the state of Alaska," Davies said.     No one doubts, however, that Alaska is earthquake country.     All along the southern coast of the state, from the Panhandle to the Alaska Peninsula and into the Aleutian Islands, the Pacific tectonic plate dives beneath the North American plate. As a result, Alaska records an earthquake of magnitude 6.0 or greater on the Richter scale about six times a year.     Seismologists have made an art of studying the Alaska region. The statistics tell why.     Since 1900, monitors have recorded 25 temblors of Richter 7.0 or stronger - the biggest was the 8.4 magnitude quake of 1964.     No one here in the earthquake zone in 1964 could forget what it was like. In a 600-mile arc from Cape Yakataga on the eastern Gulf of Alaska to the Trinity Islands southwest of Kodiak, land to the north subsided by as much as 6 feet; to the south it rose by as much as 50 feet. Highways cracked; rail lines twisted. Anchorage rocked. Whole towns disappeared on the coast.     Seismologists say it is just a matter of time before a quake of magnitude 8.0 or stronger hits Alaska again.     Many people, businesses, agencies and other institutions haven't thought through what they would do if such a big quake does strike, officials said.     Part of the resistance to planning for the future may have to do with the past, said one top federal earthquake expert.     "In Alaska, we have a situation where a lot of people who survived the 1964 earthquake don't feel that earthquakes are that much of a problem because they survived that very big one. But a lot has changed since 1964," said Robert Page, seismologist with the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif.     In 1964, for example, the population of Anchorage was about 50,000. Today, it's about a quarter million. The urban infrastructure is more complex. People depend more on public services.     "Anchorage is a lot more vulnerable," Page said.     If a big quake hits in wintertime, with temperatures than can rest for weeks in the 10-below to 30-below zero range, power failures or gas-line ruptures could deny heat to thousands. Also, freeway overpasses now exist where two-lane roads once were the rule.     Water and sewer lines run all over the city, and many may have been built on soft ground.     Many newer structures built since 1964 have many stories, often built on stilts above ground-level parking garages. "That sort of structure didn't fare very well in San Francisco" during the 1990 earthquake, Page said.     Martin, the state official in charge of knowing what to do in case a big quake does hit, said he's doing what he can to plan ahead and coordinate response. Some local officials have helped a lot, he said. But more needs to be done.     Schools need to get involved. Hospitals, public agencies and towns and villages need to help plan for what could happen.     "I can't cover all the bases. I don't have enough people to go around," he said.
