LOS ANGELES - The earthquake that shook Los Angeles and surrounding communities during the morning rush hour yesterday, killing two people, injuring at least 70 and damaging more than 250 buildings, was the strongest to hit the city in 20 years      The quake, which measured 6.0 on the Richter scale, caused severe damage to homes, stores and office buildings and sent frightened people pouring into streets.       The Richter scale is a measure of the energy released by an earthquake, as measured by the ground motion recorded on a seismograph. A 6.0 reading is enough to cause severe damage in a populated area. However, California has strict building codes that lessen the potential damage.    "We were petrified. We hung on to a tree and the shaking seemed to go on and on," said Amy Schneider, who was taking her daughter to school when the earthquake struck at 7:44 a.m. "It's a miracle more people weren't hurt."      The quake, which was felt as far away as San Diego, 130 miles to the south, was the strongest to hit Los Angeles since Feb. 9, 1971, when 64 people died in a tremor measuring 6.5.      A 50-foot section of the wall of the Pasadena Playhouse theater, eight miles west of central Los Angeles, collapsed and 190 buildings in the city, including City Hall, were damaged, but most only slightly, municipal officials said.      Los Angeles, a city of 9 million people who are used to earth tremors, was spared heavy damage because the epicenter was almost eight miles deep in a mountain range north of Sierra Madre, 45 miles northeast of Los Angeles city center. Fifteen old Spanish-style homes were damaged in Sierra Madre.      Roads swayed with the tremor and traffic lights were cut off, causing giant traffic jams.      Julie Nickeley, 34, was killed when she was hit by a falling steel beam at Santa Anita racetrack. A fellow worker suffered a dislocated shoulder, a woman was cut by shattered glass and at least 44 people were treated in hospitals and Red Cross emergency centers for cuts and back and shoulder injuries, hospital sources said.      The second death attributed to the quake was that of Barbara Sutherland, 68, who died of a heart attack at a hospital in the Los Angeles suburb of Glendale shortly after the temblor.      A main shopping street of Pasadena, Colorado Boulevard, was littered with glass from shattered shop windows. A furniture shop lost all its windows, and police barriers were set up around several city blocks for fear a vacant hotel might collapse.      A bookshop, also in Pasadena, reported 100,000 books fell off its shelves. Part of a church steeple collapsed.      Rock slides were also reported, in the area, and some cars were reported to be trapped between them.      At least 26 aftershocks were felt along the Sierra Madre fault, one of a series of faults crisscrossing the area. A seismologist at the California Institute of Technology, Egill Hauksson, said the aftershocks were expected to continue for the next few days.      The shaking - likened by one inhabitant to being on a roller coaster - lasted about 18 seconds.      "I felt this was the big one we are always being promised," said Harry Fong, an electrician. "It was really strong, but we are still all here."     In the town of Sierra Madre, near the epicenter, Maud Danielsen swept shards of glass that had fallen from a window outside her apartment building.     Her losses included 200-year-old crystal she had brought from her native Norway. But she said that didn't really matter.     "We have our lives, that's the most important thing," Danielsen said.
