DEHRA DUN, India - Medical teams and thousands of troops rushed to the Himalayan foothills today to aid survivors of an earthquake that killed at least 367 people, triggering landslides and flattening thousands of villages     Some news reports said the toll from yesterday's quake along the Indian-Tibetan border could reach 500. The Indian Express, a national newspaper, said at least 1,500 people were feared dead but gave no source.     The earthquake, measured at 6.1 on the Richter scale by Indian seismologists, flattened tens of thousands of homes and set off slides in about 400 villages of northern Uttar Pradesh state, police said.     The U.S. Geological Survey put the magnitude at 7.1. The worst-hit area, the Uttarkashi region, is about 30 miles northeast of this city of 250,000.     The area is 160 miles northeast of New Delhi, but the tortuous mountain roads to the hilly region, known for its trekking trails, cover double that distance.     Communications to the area, shaky even in normal times, were snapped by the quake and have not been restored. Officials are relying on infrequent radio connections, one Dehra Dun official said.     But relief efforts were beginning, said officials in Uttar Pradesh state.     Police said at least 2,000 people were injured.     The thousands of soldiers and medical teams arriving in the area were distributing rice, blankets and medicines.     The Hindustan Times newspaper said Uttarkashi town suffered four jolts after the first 45-second tremor struck at 2:53 a.m. The town of 20,000 people received the biggest jolt, suffering the highest damage when concrete buildings collapsed and landslides crushed small houses, the Statesman newspaper said.     "The rocky upheaval smashed an entire section of Uttarkashi town," the newspaper said.     Uttar Pradesh Revenue Minister Brahm Dutt Dwivedi said at least 367 deaths had been reported, according to United News of India.     Searchers had recovered 300 bodies in Uttarkashi, Dwivedi, the revenue minister, told United News. He said the 67 other deaths were reported outside of Uttarkashi.
