Work that should have been done to anchor safety equipment at Hanford in case of an earthquake may never have been completed, according to an internal memo not released publicly.      Westinghouse Hanford Co., which runs the Hanford Nuclear Reservation near Richland for the U.S. Department of Energy, has begun an investigation to determine the scope of the problem, officials said last week.      They are investigating equipment in the tank farms, where decades worth of deadly ingredients from nuclear bomb-fuel production rest uneasily in 117 underground storage tanks, and at the Plutonium Finishing Plant, where huge boxes contain radioactive and toxic wastes.      Westinghouse isn't sure yet how widespread the problem is, said Vern Severud, manager of the Stabilization and Retrieval Engineering department.      "We have found some things we don't like," said Severud. "We are definitely on a find-and-fix approach at Hanford."      The potential problems exist in equipment and components that are supposed to be secured in case of earthquakes.      A random sample of paperwork showed that at least one possibly unsafe situation may exist in the Plutonium Finishing Plant, now shut down but still housing various kinds of radioactive and toxic waste, including plutonium.      The paperwork sample showed that a "criticality alarm howler," meant to warn of an impending nuclear chain reaction, might not be earthquake-proof.      That alarm, like others, is classified as "safety class 2," which means its failure could result in harm to large groups of people on the Hanford site.      Jim Thomas, research director for Hanford Education Action League (HEAL), a watchdog organization, said earthquake preparedness has been a persistent thorn in Westinghouse's side, especially regarding the Plutonium Finishing Plant, which the Department of Energy would like to reopen sometime in the near future.      It's crucial that equipment such as a criticality alarm function in an earthquake, Thomas said. "That's a really dangerous situation, because if you're not running within seconds, you're dead. Criticality happens within fractions of a second."      It is also possible, officials said, that similar problems with equipment and components exist at the tank farms, where radioactive and chemical wastes have been stored for up to four decades.      In six cases Westinghouse checked - including the alarm at the Plutonium Finishing Plant, equipment at the Plutonium-Uranium Extraction (PUREX) Plant and wiring, switches and alarms in other buildings - officials found no written evidence that mandated earthquake-readiness work was done.      "We're not happy that the recent work has not been fully in compliance with our new more stringent requirements, in regard to documentation," said Tom Conrad, manager of Structural Margins Assessment.      Westinghouse's Quality Assurance department tried to get information on how widespread the problem was, said Quality Assurance Manager A.J. Fisher, by sending an employee to talk to engineers on the jobs.      "He didn't in all cases get good answers, which led him to have this memo written, instead of assuming these were isolated cases," Fisher said.      In April, Fisher's department sent the directive to managers of several departments, including the manager of Hanford's tank farm, asking that managers take corrective action.      At this point, officials said, they don't know if they have a problem with the actual equipment, or whether the work was done but not documented.      "We cannot be absolutely sure," said Conrad. "That's why we take this very seriously and are working to better understand this."      Bob Cook, a retired Nuclear Regulatory Commission worker who keeps a critical eye on operations at Hanford, said it was troubling that some of the work was supposed to have been done as long as three years ago. "That makes it very suspicious," he said. "Why so long not accomplished?"      Westinghouse managers point out that not all the equipment is itself safety-related, but some may pose a hazard in an earthquake simply by its location. "Some equipment is located in areas where its failure might jeopardize safety-related equipment," said Conrad.     "We have an interest in making sure that things don't fall off the wall, so we don't block entrances, or fall off and hurt people," said Fisher.      "Right now, we're putting together a response to the CAR (corrective action request)," said Conrad. The equipment has not been physically inspected, he said.      Severud said work already has been done to upgrade the most critical areas, classified "safety class 1." Those are areas where a failure could harm people off the site.      "You have to keep in mind that what we're talking about are not our most critical components," Severud said of the safety class 2 equipment.      The problems were discovered last year during an audit of work done by Kaiser Engineering Hanford, said Fisher. "We discovered problems in their facility," he said. "At that point, we decided to look at our own situation. . . . and decided we should take care of any problems in our own house."      The preliminary report from Kaiser, done last August, said it appears the lack of documented analysis "does not affect any systems whose failure in an earthquake could result in adverse consequences to the public or Hanford personnel."      Building structures and piping systems, the Kaiser report notes, have been consistently analyzed for earthquake preparedness. Since the concern is limited to equipment, instruments and supports, "the concern is believed to be a case of noncompliance with little or no safety significance," the report noted.
