The Pacific Northwest, geologists say, is in line for the "big one," an earthquake of vast proportions. Using a sophisticated system involving a satellite and ocean- and land-based instruments, scientists are attempting to measure minute movements in Earth plates that could determine the area's quake potential American and Canadian scientists this week are completing the first step in the most sophisticated attempt so far to measure the Pacific Northwest's big squeeze.      The project could produce information of enormous importance in assessing earthquake potential in this area.      The big squeeze, actually compression in the Earth, is tilting up this state's outer coast, moving Olympic Mountain peaks closer together and imperceptibly narrowing the Strait of Juan de Fuca.      A growing number of scientists believe that accumulating pressure, when it reaches the breaking point, could cause an earthquake greater than any ever recorded in the Pacific Northwest.      The source of compression is a creeping ocean floor, known as the Juan de Fuca Plate, that has been pushing against the Washington-British Columbia coast for millions of years.      "As the plate scrunches toward North America and dives under the continent, it's not a smooth process," said Charles DeMets of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory in Pasadena, Calif. "There's a lot of friction, putting the coastline under pressure. It's like squeezing a rubber ball, causing a shortening of distances."      This experiment aims to use both satellite and land-based instruments to measure the friction's force and resulting deformation of the coastline. It could answer a crucial question: How much energy is being stored that, when it reaches the breaking point, could be released in an earthquake?      Previous studies lend urgency to this project. A U.S. Geological Survey network on the Olympic Peninsula showed that mountain peaks up to 15 miles apart moved a small fraction of an inch closer to each other over eight years. And a joint U.S.-Canada project found similar shortening across the Strait of Juan de Fuca.      A compelling finding was that both shortenings were in the same direction, about 60 degrees east of north, in which the Juan de Fuca Plate pushes against the continent.      The U.S.-Canadian experiment marks the first time the global positioning system, navigational satellites that permit location of positions on Earth with extreme precision, has been used in connection with instruments placed on a creeping ocean floor.      The Jet Propulsion Laboratory, with about $50,000 from the National Aeronautics and Space Administration, will be responsible for calculating distances using the satellite system. Scripps Institute of Oceanography, San Diego, worked out an acoustic system linking sea-bottom instruments to buoys. The Canadian Coast Guard is providing the survey ship Tully for 12 days, at a cost of $20,000 a day. Geological Surveys of the United States and Canada will tie in their land-surveying networks wit h the study.      The Tully, at sea since last Monday, is scheduled to return to Sidney, B.C., Friday.      Here is the plan: Transponders, which echo acoustic signals from the surface, were placed in two locations: on the creeping ocean floor about 40 miles west of the Olympic Peninsula under more than 8,000 feet of water, and on the continental shelf about 30 miles to the northeast in 650 feet of water.      The two instrument packages straddle the subduction zone, the trench where the Juan de Fuca Plate begins its dive beneath the continent.      Precise positions of the ocean-bottom instruments will be determined as the transponders echo pings sent by buoys. Then scientists will use the satellite system to determine exact distances between the two ocean-bottom locations, as well as from the instruments to points on land. What they learn over the next several years may be crucial.      "The more commonly accepted theory is that the Juan de Fuca Plate is moving but that the subduction zone (where the plate dives under the continent) is locked," said Larry Young of JPL. "This theory says the motion is being taken up by compression of the North American Plate (on which the continent rests)."      If this idea is right, it would mean that at some point, the locked (Juan de Fuca) plate would break loose and jump ahead, releasing energy for a major earthquake.      The other theory is that the Juan de Fuca Plate is moving steadily under the continent with little friction, perhaps lubricated by wet, slippery sediments.      "But if we have a perfectly lubricated system, it would be very difficult to explain the surface strain detected in the Olympic Peninsula work," said Herb Dragert of the Pacific Geoscience Center in Sidney, B.C., a participant in the experiment.      Geological evidence indicates that the Juan de Fuca Plate over the past 10 million years has crept an average of 4 centimeters, or about an inch and a half, a year. If this is true today, the deep water instrument package, riding piggyback on the plate, should move at the same rate.      If friction between the subducting plate and overlying rock has caused the system to become locked deep below the surface, effects of the friction should be detectable at other stations.      "Any (instrument) station we have in shallow water (on the continental shelf), or on land right along the coast, would be expected to be dragged along, but at a slower rate (less than the 4-centimeter movement of the Juan de Fuca Plate) as it resisted the ocean plate movement," Dragert said.      "It is this resistance, the buildup of elastic energy, that will tell us the potential for the next earthquake."      Distances from underwater coastal stations will be measured to sites far inland, where scientists assume the North American Plate is stable and free of the deformations along its western edge.      "This is a new technology that is just being developed at the same time we're making our first measurements this season," Young said. "We think our instruments are accurate enough to make these measurements, but we'll be spending a lot of time making sure."      The team plans to repeat measurements next year and then visit the area every other year.      "It will be several years before we begin to have any results," Young said.      The system is expected to produce measurements accurate to within 3 to 5 millimeters, DeMets said. (A millimeter is about 1/25th of an inch.)      "Time is our biggest ally in this project," DeMets said. "If the plate moves 40 centimeters (almost 16 inches) in 10 years, we'll still have the same accuracy.      "But we'll also need to measure the small fraction of the plate movement that we expect to see at the coastal stations and on the continental shelf."      Friction between a downgoing plate and overlying continental rock above it would also be expected to tip the western edge of the continent, like a teeter-totter. This has been detected.      Astoria, Ore., near the mouth of the Columbia River, and Neah Bay at the tip of the Olympic Peninsula are being uplifted. At the other end of the teeter-totter, Seattle and Tacoma are sinking slightly.      One way of looking at the experiment, DeMets said, is that "We are measuring the strain that causes temporary surface deformation in the interim between major earthquakes. When strain exceeds the breaking point, energy is released in an earthquake allowing the Earth's surface to relax back to where it had been" before strain built up.      Although no great earthquakes have been recorded in the Pacific Northwest in modern times, there is geological evidence along the outer coast that the ground has repeatedly dropped suddenly as much as six feet. This would be consistent with the "surface relaxation" that could occur in a major subduction earthquake.      Geologists have found clues in coastal estuaries of as many as 13 such instances in the past 6,850 years, with the most recent about 300 years ago. Geophysicists estimate that such earthquakes could have registered magnitudes of 8.5 to 9.1 on the Richter scale.      In addition, oceanographers have found deposits left by huge avalanches on the continental shelf that could have been shaken loose by major earthquakes.      The satellite-navigation system has been used previously to measure movement along faults in the Earth, including the San Andreas Fault in California. But this is a first for the difficult job of placing and monitoring instruments on the ocean floor.      "That's the novelty of this experiment, and the challenge," Dragert said. "If we had an island out there, or a seamount with a knoll poking up above the ocean, it would make life a heck of a lot easier." ---------------------------------- DETECTING MOVEMENT OF THE SEA FLOOR      In an effort to learn more about earthquake potential in the Pacific Northwest, a years-long experiment has begun to measure motion of the creeping ocean floor through the use of the global-positioning system which can determine locations on Earth to within a small fraction of an inch. Juan de Fuca Plate      Geologists believe that the ocean floor off the Washington-British Columbia coast is creeping northeast, pushing against the continent. As the creeping Juan de Fuca Plate encounters the continental shelf, leading edge of the North America Plate, it dives beneath the continent. A concert is that the plate has become locked below the coastline. If so, energy of the moving plate offshore is being stored and could be released in a major earthquake if the diving plate breaks loose.      1. A surface buoy towed by the Canadian survey ship Tully will use sound signals to determine precise locations of transponders on the sea bottom.      2. Data will be radioed to navigational satellites and to land stations far inland.      3. The distance between the sea-bottom transponders and land stations will be calculated from this year's data. Similar measurements in future years will reveal how much the sea bottom is moving. Source: Jet Propulsion Laboratory, Pasadena, Calif.; The Pacific Geoscience Center, Sidney, B.CCaption:  ILLUSTRATIONRANDEE S. FOX / SEATTLE TIMES: DETECTING MOVEMENT OF THE SEA FLOOR (SEE END OF TEXT. GRAPHICS NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY.)
