BRIER - It was to be an easy week of swimming and relaxation along the southeastern beaches of Costa Rica.      But in a matter of seconds last week, when the earth violently shook the small Central American country, the thoughts of two vacationing Brier teenagers instantly turned from sun-tanning to survival.      "We were acting like tourists and having fun," recalled 16-year-old Andi Piper, a Mountlake Terrace High School student. "Then we were on our hands and knees . . . trees falling."      The April 22 earthquake, which measured 7.4 on the Richter scale, hit Costa Rica and parts of Panama, killing dozens of people. The next four days turned into a nightmare for Andi, companions Jill Nissen, her brother Jeff and his wife, Francine, as they tried to get out of the country.       Jeff and Francine had gone to Costa Rica for their honeymoon and had invited Jill and Andi to join them for a week at a small village near Puerto Limon, the country's main Caribbean port.      Andi and Jill, 18, an Edmonds Community College student, returned to Brier Saturday after five days of agonizing waits, sleepless nights and constant hunger. Jeff and Francine Nissen are expected to return to the Seattle area soon, they said.      The teenagers' photos, like their vacation, started innocently enough. . . . "Here's the hotel. Here's the beach and the nice coconut trees . . . here's the cracked road."      When the quake hit shortly before 4 p.m., the three women were at the beach, talking and lighting a fire to cook fish. Jeff and a Costa Rican friend were fishing at a nearby lagoon.      "We had been swimming all day. We sat under the palm trees, eating oranges," Jill said.      Then the rumble began. "It kept getting stronger," she said. The spot where they were sitting collapsed into a hole and the sandy beach fractured in thousands of places.      Nearby, trees were falling all around Jeff, who fell into a hole. He later showed up at the beach, covered with mud.      "He could have died but Garvin (their Costa Rican friend) pulled him out," Jill said.      Then the water retreated, exposing the coral reef for more than a mile.  Then the water rushed back in, covering the beach in a furious tide that almost swallowed Francine.      "We didn't know how serious it was," Andi said. "But it was really scary that night."      "The aftershocks (more than 300 were reported) were really big. We pulled our mattresses outside," Jill said.      There was no food and the water was undrinkable. Things were no better in Puerto Limon, where temperatures had reached 100 degrees and pandemonium reigned. One of their few meals consisted solely of two cans of tuna and animal crackers.      Andi had been able to make a 40-second call to her mother, who was a nervous wreck after watching the news shortly after the quake.      "We wanted to ask a million questions," said Patty Piper, who thought the trip would be a learning experience for her daughter.      Getting out of Puerto Limon wasn't easy. At first, they thought a rescue helicopter or airplane would take them to San Jose, the country's capital. After hours of waiting, they jumped on a bus.      The main road east from the capital of San Jose to Limon was closed and two bridges were damaged, cutting off supply and relief routes.      But they made it across one river by jumping on top of a flatbed truck with dozens of other people.      Across the river, an empty school bus waited. They crammed into the bus, but the driver didn't show up.      "I think this is just an old abandoned school bus," Jill remembers her brother say. They voted to leave the bus and try their luck somewhere else.      The vote cost them their seats on the bus and they had to ride on the steps when the driver finally arrived.      Jill and Andi didn't celebrate until their airplane left Costa Rica bound for home.      "Right now I don't want to leave Brier for a while," Jill said.Caption:  PHOTOTERI HARRIS / SEATTLE TIMES: ANDI PIPER, 16, LEFT, AND HER FRIEND, JILL NISSEN, 18, BOTH OF BRIER, RECALL HOW THEY GAVE EACH OTHER A HIGH-FIVE WHEN THEIR AIRPLANE LEFT COSTA RICA BOUND FOR HOME. THE TWO WERE VACATIONING IN COSTA RICA WHEN AN EARTHQUAKE, MEASURING 7.4 ON THE RICHTER SCALE, SHOOK THE COUNTRY ON APRIL 22
