"After Shocks/Near Escapes" by Stephen Dobyns Viking, $19.95 On May 22, 1960, an earthquake measuring 8.5 on the Richter scale hit southern Chile, lasting a full three minutes and killing more than 4,000 people. The quake set off tidal waves that claimed hundreds of victims as far away as Hawaii and Japan, and activated several Andean volcanoes close to its epicenter.      Aftershocks continued into August, with some radio reports predicting that one final cataclysmic quake would send a sizable chunk of southern Chile into the sea. Small wonder, then, that an apocalyptic fervor took hold of the more devoutly Catholic segment of the population.      A natural catastrophe on this scale has intrinsic drama. But Stephen Dobyns, making use of anecdotes supplied by his Chilean wife and in-laws, makes  even more of it than might be expected in his new novel, "After Shocks/Near Escapes." Seeing the event 30 years later through the eyes of 38-year-old Lucy Recabarren, he uses the disaster as a linchpin for a brilliant meditation on the nature of childhood and the passing of time.      Dobyns - a poet and mystery writer whose best-known literary novel, "The Two Deaths of Senora Puccini," also had a Latin American setting - moves with subtlety and quiet humor between the adult world and the world of children. In doing so, he unfolds a powerful family drama, the full import of which is understood by Lucy only over a span of decades.      His writing is luminous, clear, with a lilting inflection that suggests the Spanish of its locale. The supple handling of the interplay of childhood experience and adult recollection invites comparison with L.P. Hartley's "The Go-Between" or Virginia Woolf's "To the Lighthouse."      If that's not enough to grab you, maybe the book's opening sentence will: "Even before the earthquake my grandmother liked to say how wonderful it would be if we could all die together."      This startling death wish, Lucy reveals, stems from her grandmother's desire for the whole family to arrive in heaven at the same time, "in a group as if on a bus." Lucy and her 10-year-old brother Spartaco are skeptical about how much fun this would be, but given the turmoil of their quake-stricken world, where buildings swing "back and forth tossing bricks and glass . . . like beads of sweat," their grandmother's literal belief doesn't seem far-fetched.      Lucy's receptiveness to the notion of heaven, and hell, increases when her father is hit by one of those flying bricks and dies, scandalously, in the arms of his mistress. With their house destroyed,  the electricity out and the one paved road to Santiago in ruins, Lucy and Spartaco set out on foot for their grandparents' farm, accompanied by their dumbstruck 6-year-old brother and humiliated, grieving mother.      At the farm, the tremors continue and a wide array of aunts, uncles and cousins gather for an end-of-the-world reunion. Lucy's grandmother has no doubts that her wish is about to come true.      Among those present are Lucy's Uncle Alcibiades, still a bachelor at 35 because he "was afraid to close the door on his choices"; his disgruntled older brother, Hellmuth, who imagines a "more powerful and successful self . . . so vivid to him that it was as if he were that bigger self's smaller friend"; and Hellmuth's self-absorbed wife, Dalila, who misses her perfume and jewelry, blames Hellmuth for the destruction of their home, and finds the whole ordeal "boring."      There are a dozen more characters - an alcoholic aunt, a gluttonous uncle, a great-aunt who professes to be a witch - all memorably rendered. But it's Alcibiades, Hellmuth and Dalila who dominate the domestic drama that destroys all possibility of a group entrance through the pearly gates.      Dobyns' intricate character analysis lends weight even to the flighty Dalila, while Lucy's comments on the nature of perception take the book beyond mere family chronicle. In an eloquent exploration of the workings of time and memory, she suggests that our recollection of past events varies according to the mood of the moment - and that, by the same token, we see the present moment "through what we imagine these past events to be."      This shifting, illusory quality lends "After Shocks/Near Escapes" a quicksilver evanescence that both illuminates and transcends Lucy's losses and grief. Add to that Dobyns' deft character portrayal and epigrammatic wit, and you have a novel of serene depth and lyrical precision. Michael Upchurch is a Seattle novelist and criticCaption:  PHOTO1) STEPHEN DOBYNS2) AP: A DISASTROUS EARTHQUAKE IN CHILE SETS THE STAGE FOR A POWERFUL FAMILY DRAMA IN STEPHEN DOBYNS' "AFTER SHOCKS/NEAR ESCAPES."
