Further evidence pinpoints the occurrence of a big earthquake along coastal Washington about 300 years ago. It also suggests that we may be in for a "Big One" that packs a thousand times the energy of the Bay Area quake of 1989 In the mud and dead tree roots of places like Willapa Bay, geologist Brian Atwater has found new evidence of past and future catastrophes that make the Puget basin earthquakes of 1949 and 1965 look like mere jiggles.      The focus of Washington's "Big One" would be on its ocean coast. The roar and rocking would come first, violently wrenching coastal communities and swaying skyscrapers in distant Seattle. Then coastal land would drop, perhaps as much as 6 feet. Finally, giant tsunami waves would rush in, surging over beaches and flooding far up into ocean estuaries.      When it was over, some communities might be gone. Subsiding pasture and forest would be turned to salt marsh.      It happened in Chile in 1960, pummeling coastal communities with a wall of water nearly 40 feet high.      It happened in Alaska in 1964, drowning communities such as Portage Bay and Valdez and wreaking havoc in Anchorage.      And it happened on Washington's coast in about 1700.      It could happen again, geologists Atwater and Minze Stuiver have concluded, after using radiocarbon dating on the roots of spruce killed by a geologic catastrophe three centuries ago.      The energy released by such a subduction zone quake - which is different than the more common fault zone quakes - could be as much as 1,000 times that which shook the San Francisco Bay area in 1989, Atwater said.      The pair's research, published in the prestigious British science journal Nature in September, is the latest clue in a growing chain of circumstantial evidence suggesting the Washington-Oregon coast has been wracked with periodic mammoth earthquakes.      "I work in an unreinforced building," said Atwater, a U.S. Geological Survey employee based at the University of Washington. "My daughter is in an unreinforced masonry school. I'd love to find evidence that we don't get giant earthquakes. It would be very heartening. But the odds that we're going to blow this hypothesis out of the water look increasingly slim."      Atwater's interest began in the mid-1980s when he went to Neah Bay on the Olympic Peninsula to measure how fast coastal areas were rising, because of the collision of geologic plates that has uplifted western North America.      He found the coast climbs on average about a tenth of an inch per year. Other research showed the Olympics are being compressed by the underground pressure, with peaks about 20 miles apart have been squeezed a fraction of an inch closer together the past eight years.      The uplift is not consistent, however. "Much to my shock, I found that 1,000 years ago the land suddenly dropped into the sea," Atwater said.      Eventually, he concluded Washington's coast had suddenly plunged - in amounts ranging from 1 1/2 to 6 feet - on at least six different occasions the past 7,000 years, erasing much of the gain produced by the year-to-year uplift.      Atwater explained the mechanism:      The Earth's surface is made up of rocky plates that float and grind together above a mantle of molten rock heated by the planet's internal radioactivity.      Many of the oceanic plates are growing. The floor of the Pacific Ocean is spreading, for example, fed by new molten material that emerges from rifts off the Washington and Oregon coasts. As the widening sea floor pushes against North America, it is pushed under, or subducted, by the thicker, heavier continental plate. As it dives under, the ocean plate reheats and eventually once more turns molten.      By the time the diving plate is as far east as the Cascade Mountains it is hot, soft and slippery. Its movement past the continental plate above can trigger quakes but the slipperiness prevents too great a build-up of pressure, limiting them to a magnitude of 7.5 or so. The 1949 quake that shook the Puget Sound basin, the biggest in historical record locally, was 7.1.      At the coast, however, the newly subducted ocean plate is stiffer. It pushes harder against North America, lifting the coast upward.      But periodically the grinding plates jolt forward past each other in what is called a subduction zone quake. The quake can extend over hundreds of miles with huge force as the pressure of the colliding plates is released. The 1960 Chile quake has been estimated to have a magnitude as high as 9.5, a theoretical maximum, making it possibly the largest on record.      Atwater, who visited the site of the Chile quake, said one survivor thought a nuclear war had started. At a fishing village that disappeared, people "took to their boats, having lost their faith in the solid earth, and were met with a wall of water 10 meters (nearly 40 feet) high," the geologist  recounted. Hundreds were killed.      Scientists were also stunned by the Alaska quake that saw some land slip sideways as much as 60 feet, indicating geologic change can come in astounding fits and starts.      Because earthquake scales are logarithmic, the energy of a colossal coastal quake measuring 9.5 could be 1,000 times as great as San Francisco's 1989 shaking, Atwater said. That doesn't mean buildings would shake 1,000 times as violently; that energy would be spread over a much broader area. But the movement would be severe.      The evidence of past catastrophes is sobering. Atwater and other scientists have sampled groves of ghostly gray dead cedar trees, killed 300 years ago when the forest floor dropped and the incoming sea turned their habitat into salt marsh.      On the Oregon coast, investigator Wendy Grant has found the outlines of Native American fire pits that appear to have been buried by a layer of sand laid down by giant tsunami waves.      Geologic evidence is clear that coastal estuaries have subsided and tsunamis have carried sand far inland. Atwater looked in September for a third bit of confirmation, places where earthquake pressures produced small craters from what are called "vented sand volcanoes." So far that search has been inconclusive.      But the ability to confirm the date of the most recent big quake in two places 38 miles apart has added additional credence to his concern that a "Big One" could happen here.      One of Atwater's knottiest problems was dating the most recent big subsidence. While sticks or peat could be found that were hurled about by the quake, their age was not necessarily the age of the disturbance. Worse, radiocarbon dating - which estimates age by measuring radioactive decay - was extremely fuzzy when used for events less than a few centuries old.      What he and Stuiver did was find nine buried Sitka spruce stumps at Willapa Bay and the Copalis River in Southwestern Washington. By carbon dating interior rings, matching them to cedar trees killed at the same time, and consulting historical records of what the marshes looked like in the mid-1800s they deduced the quake's probable time was between 1680 and 1720, before historic exploration.      The next test will be to find similar dated evidence as far away as coastal Oregon, indicating a quake long enough to be a subduction event, and big enough to reach a magnitude of 8 or 9.      When will the next quake hit? Past timing has been irregular, Atwater said, with quakes apparently hitting 300, 1,100 and 1,600 years ago.      But while the near-term risk is unknown, agencies such as the Nuclear Regulatory Commission, which tries to anticipate the worst-possible quakes when siting power plants, has shown interest in Atwater's research.      Nor should Seattle residents be complacent that the quake would hit the coast hardest, Atwater said.      "There is a potential for a severe resonance of the buildings downtown," he said, pointing to a 1985 ocean quake that severely damaged Mexico CityCaption:  ILLUSTRATIONRANDEE S. FOX / SEATTLE TIMES: FOCUSING ON THE `BIG ONE'
