MOSCOW - A strong earthquake today sent rocks cascading down mountains onto homes in the Soviet republic of Georgia, killing at least 30 people, authorities said.     The quake was felt in neighboring Armenia, which was devastated by a 1988 earthquake that killed 25,000 people, but no damage was reported there.     The temblor struck at 2:13 p.m. (12:13 a.m. PDT) in mountainous north-central Georgia and measured 7.1 on the Richter scale, the Soviet Central Seismic Station reported. The epicenter was near Ambrolauri, a town of 17,000 population about 75 miles northwest of Tbilisi, capital of Georgia.     "The mountain fell onto the houses," said Marina Starostina, a Georgian government spokeswoman in Moscow.     First reports said the town of Dzhava, 60 miles northwest of Tbilisi, was hardest hit. Ten people were killed in Dzhava, said Zurab Kadzhaya, a police spokesman in Kutaisi, a city 63 miles west of Dzhava. The Georgian government office in Moscow also said 30 homes were damaged in the town of 11,000 people.     Six people were killed in the towns of Onei and Ambrolauri, west of Dzhava, Kadzhaya said.     Don Finley of the U.S. Geological Survey in Reston, Va., put the Richter reading of today's quake at 7.2 on the Richter scale and said the temblor released about four times as much energy as the 1988 temblor.     The epicenter of the area affected by today's quake is about 120 miles from Leninakan, the Armenian city hardest hit by the 1988 quake. Today's quake was felt in Leninakan, but no damage was reported.     Rocks slid off a mountainside onto houses in Chiatura, and a railroad station was "severely damaged" in the mountain town of Sachkhere, Georgian officials in Moscow said.     "It was terrible, really terrible," Marina Ivanova, a pediatrician in the Georgian capital of Tbilisi, said by telephone. "The building was shaking like a house of cards. We grabbed our children and rushed downstairs," she said.     The news agency Tass said the quake was felt for 30 seconds in Yerevan, the Armenian capital.Caption:  MAPKNIGHT-RIDDER NEWSPAPERS: CENTER OF QUAKE
