CAIRO, Egypt - Last week's earthquake did more damage to Egypt's monuments than previously believed, including harming a rich store of pharaonic relics at Luxor in southern Egypt, the country's top antiquities official says    Initial estimates placed the number of damaged monuments below 50, mainly to ancient Islamic sites in the Cairo area. But updated figures released yesterday showed damage to more than 150 ancient monuments throughout the country.    The Oct. 12 quake caused cracks in some of the country's top attractions. These include the Valley of the Kings, the burial site of Tutankhamun, and Queen Hatshepsut's temple at Deir el-Bahri in the south from the 15th century B.C., Ibrahim Bakr, chairman of Egypt's Antiquities Organization, said yesterday.    And there is now fear that landslides from an unstable ridge lying between the valley and the queen's temple could bury the monuments, Bakr said.    Other well-known tourist attractions that were cracked include the Oracle Temple at Siwa Oasis near Libya, Luxor Temple and Ramses II's mortuary temple opposite Luxor on the west bank of the Nile River, he said.    The earthquake, measuring 5.9 on the Richter scale, was centered a few miles south of Egypt's main tourist attractions, the Sphinx and Giza pyramids.    Felt throughout Egypt and as far away as Jerusalem, it killed nearly 550 people, injured more than 6,000 and destroyed or damaged hundreds of buildings.    Only a few stones fell from the Giza pyramids, and Bakr said the Sphinx apparently suffered no damage. He said most damage to the pharaonic monuments amounted to no more than cracks, and none are closed to tourists.    But surveys now show the quake hit other regions rich with antiquities believed earlier to have been spared. Many of the damaged structures already were weakened - first by ancient earthquakes, then by pollution.      Bakr said damage was located or suspected at three major sites:     --  Cairo's ancient Islamic quarter, the largest trove of standing Islamic monuments, where 30 mosques were critically damaged;    --  Old Cairo, with its early Coptic Christian churches, a Jewish cemetery and Roman walls;    --  Luxor, southern Egypt's tourist capital and the site of the ancient capital Thebes.    Bakr said Egypt lacks the expertise and money to tackle repairs that could take 20 years or more. He estimated the initial repair cost at $63 million and appealed for international technical and financial help.    "These monuments belong not only to Egypt but are a world heritage," Bakr said. "The world has helped Egypt in the past to save its monuments. We hope the world will do it again.
