Editor, The Times: With the recent quakes in California, Seattle residents have become increasingly aware of the dangers and risks associated with living in an earthquake-prone area.     Predictions of a much larger earthquake here in the Northwest once again press the need for civic awareness. To date there is no strategy to deal with household and individual preparedness. Immediately following an earthquake elsewhere, Northwest citizens temporarily consider their own risks. Inevitably, the need for safety disappears in a few months.     The city of Seattle has been leading the country in recycling, and laws regarding seatbelts have long been on the books. Why is there not a law regarding individual household disaster readiness?      Could the city, state or national governments create easily understandable legislation that requires tenants, homeowners and businesses to have on their premises canned food, water and fire-extinguishers or any other goods or equipment necessary to sustain life for 72 hours (the time recommended by most emergency agencies)? The Red Cross, fire and police departments could be consulted for specific items and language. Food and water are cheap enough, while fire extinguishers for low-inc ome people might be underwritten by government grants. Insurance companies could offer discount premiums for those prepared (especially against fire).     Adults are expected to provide car seats for children, car companies must provide seat belts and houses must be built to certain codes. Many of these laws (such as seat-belt wearing) are not necessarily 100 percent enforceable but more important for civic awareness.     If citizens were required to protect their family and friends in the event of a disaster, we might just finally get serious, now, rather than after "the big one." Seattle could take pride in 100 percent readiness and lead the rest of the country, as it should.     Remember, in a disaster, 7-Eleven may be closed, too. - Ed Hartman, SeattlCaption:  ILLUSTRATIONMIKE LUCKOVICH / ATLANTA CONSTITUTION: ALAN JUST CAUGHT AN EXCELLENT WAVE!
