ANKARA, Turkey - A strong earthquake struck eastern Turkey yesterday and reports said more than 570 people died. Ahmet Karabilgin, the governor of Sivas province, told the semi-official Anatolia news agency that at least 500 bodies were pulled from the wreckage in Erzincan, the city worst hit by the quake, about 350 miles east of Ankara.    Fikret Cuhadaroglu, the governor of Erzincan province, said another 78 people were reported dead in towns in the eastern part of the province.    "All of a sudden I saw the wall coming down and the city swinging like a cradle. I still hear the cries of my son calling for me," Ahmet Elden, an Erzincan resident, told Anatolia. His wife and four children were buried under the wreckage of his apartment building. He was pulled out by his neighbors, Anatolia said.    "Dead bodies were everywhere in the city center," said an unidentified man in a hospital bed interviewed by state television.    The quake is the worst in Turkey since 1983, when a temblor in Erzurum claimed 1,330 lives.    State television said yesterday's quake measured 6.2 on the Richter scale and struck Erzincan, Erzurum and another province, Bingol, at 7:20 p.m. The U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif. said it was even stronger, measuring 6.8. The 1983 quake registered 7.1.    Panicked residents in the quake-hit provinces were spending the night outdoors despite freezing temperatures, according to the television.    Hundreds of soldiers were sent to Erzincan aboard buses to help rescue efforts, Anatolia said. The quake caused an avalanche that closed the railway between Erzincan and Erzurum.    A police official in Erzurum said the quake lasted about one minute.    "It seems we are witnessing a great disaster. The picture seems very dramatic," Premier Suleyman Demirel told reporters after a Cabinet meeting. He refrained from mentioning any death toll. He said communication problems made it difficult to estimate a figure.    Governor Cuhadaroglu said two hotels, eight office blocks, a hospital building, a medical school and many apartment buildings "had totally collapsed," the television reported.    The governor said 62 students were buried under the wreckage of the school. He said only two people were rescued from the debris of other buildings.    He also said heavy damage was reported in poor residential areas at the city outskirts and that a power failure hampered rescue effort.    Erzincan's deputy governor, Mehmet Unal, said civilians and officials were trying to save some 400 people buried under collapsed buildings.      Unal said the area was shaken by several aftershocks. Turkey's Aegean and Mediterranean coastal areas and the entire eastern region sit atop an earthquake-prone belt known as the Anatolian fault.    The Richter scale is a gauge of the energy released by an earthquake, as measured by the ground motion recorded on a seismograph.    An earthquake of magnitude 6 can cause severe damage. One of 7 is considered a major quake, capable of widespread, heavy damage.Caption:  MAPKNIGHT-RIDDER NEWSPAPERS: EARTHQUAKE KILLS HUNDREDS IN REGION (MAP NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY)
