EVERETT - Don Mell always thought of himself as a tough, unshakeable sort of guy. But when a teacher handed him a letter containing $124 raised by her students for victims of April's Northern California earthquake, the Mill Creek man couldn't stop the tears.     The donation prompted an emotional release for Mell, who had spent three weeks working nonstop, feeling numerous aftershocks and seeing the destruction and the pain left behind by a major earthquake.     Now that he is back in Washington after assisting quake victims, Mell and his colleagues from the Everett-based Snohomish County Chapter of the American Red Cross still get misty-eyed when they recall their experiences. For Mell, the donation from a Eureka, Calif., teacher symbolized the best in human nature amid one of nature's worst disasters.     "It was a tough three weeks," said Dottie Stewart of Everett, director of disaster services for the Red Cross chapter, who along with Mell returned last week. "Sometimes we didn't even worry about the aftershocks. We were just too busy trying to give help."      About 10 Red Cross volunteers from Washington, including the three from Snohomish County, left behind their homes and jobs to help in the massive relief effort in Northern California after a series of earthquakes and aftershocks beginning April 25 damaged or destroyed more than 1,000 homes.     The main quake, which registered 6.9 on the Richter scale, injured 95 people and caused millions of dollars in damage, mostly in the small towns of Petrolia, Scotia, Ferndale and Rio Dell.     "We were dealing with people who lost everything. Case after case. Nothing but destruction. It really wore on you," said Everett volunteer Geri Moore.     "How do you last three weeks? Tenacity. You have to concentrate on the reasons why you are there," Stewart said.     For the three Snohomish County residents, the destruction was a sobering lesson. For years, they have heard about the long overdue quake that was supposed to hit the Puget Sound area. Sharing their knowledge with 300 other chapter volunteers is at the top of their list.     "We are overdue for an earthquake. We need to be ready for emergencies," said Stewart, who kept a record of the magnitude and duration of at least 30 aftershocks.     But the aftershocks paled when it came to people's anguish.     "People were in different stages of shock," Moore said. "Most of them had lost everything. The ground was moving constantly. Everything moved."      Still, she found the time to do those little things that for some people mean everything.     Moore remembers a disabled woman who had lost a pet rabbit, which was a favorite among neighborhood children. Moore found her a new rabbit.     While the emotional roller coaster for the three Red Cross members finally has come to an end, they are still trying to adjust to the jolts of daily life.     Mell, a vice president at a Mill Creek electronics company, is back to work. The same is happening with Moore, who is doing other volunteer work, including planting a garden in Marysville.
