FERNDALE, Calif. - A powerful earthquake rocked the sparsely populated Northern California coast yesterday, knocking brick facades off buildings, sparking fires that destroyed several businesses and a post office. Officials said 45 people were injured, including eight who were hospitalized. The magnitude 6.9 quake began its long rumble through Humboldt County at 11:06 a.m. It was centered in a rural area about 35 miles south of Eureka, seismologists said, and shock waves were felt 260 miles away in San Francisco and in parts of Oregon and Nevada.    It was California's second major earthquake in less than a week, but was unrelated to the Southern California quake late Wednesday, scientists with the U.S. Geological Surveys said.     Later last night, a powerful aftershock knocked out some power lines, a Eureka police dispatcher said.    A Richter reading on the aftershock, which occurred about 9:42 p.m., was not immediately available, but "it appears it was in the same general area," as the earlier quake, Presgrave said.    The aftershock appeared to have caused additional damage to the hard-hit cities of Ferndale and Fortuna, but the extent of that damage wasn't immediately known, said Wendy Chapman, a Ferndale police dispatcher.    The quake also apparently caused some gas leaks, said Chapman. "We've got all our emergency personnel going as fast as they can."     The heaviest damage from yesterday's quake was in Ferndale, a dairy town and artist colony of 1,700 that is home to some of California's best-preserved Victorian homes.    "It was one enormous pow - a bang - and then it just kept going and going," said Gary Edgemon, 41, who owns a Ferndale meat store and serves with the town's volunteer fire department.     The town was sponsoring a "Best of the West Festival" yesterday, and its quaint shops and sidewalks were jammed with celebrants in Western garb when the shaking began.    Downtown, people were knocked screaming to the ground by violent tremors that shattered many of the large storefront windows on Main Street. Two people were injured and two cars crushed when the red brick facade ofValley Grocery - housed in one of Ferndale's numerous turn-of-the-century buildings - crashed down.    At least two dozen of the town's restored Victorian homes - many of which house bed and breakfast inns and were full of guests yesterday - were thrown off their foundations. The jolt also toppled chimneys and ripped front porches from many houses.    Officials closed the main road into Ferndale, and water, telephone and power service were unavailable to many residents throughout the region for much of the day.    Gov. Pete Wilson declared a state of emergency in Humboldt County. The state set a preliminary damage figure of $3.5 million.     Authorities urged people to stay in their homes, check their gas lines and gather emergency supplies to prepare for aftershocks, which continued through the day.   To the north in Del Norte County, sheriff's officials warned people to stay away from beaches after observing unusually strong tidal activity. SECOND QUAKE THIS WEEK     The Ferndale quake comes three days after a 6.1 temblor shook remote desert communities of southeastern California, approximately 600 miles to the south. That quake, centered near Joshua Tree National Monument, caused minor injuries and an estimated $1 million in damages. Seismologists said the two events were not related.    In Petrolia, a sheep ranching town of about 1,000 people south of Ferndale, at least 20 homes were jarred off their foundations. A post office, restaurant and store were burned to the ground, and the fire station and town hall also were damaged, officials with the state Office of Emergency Services reported.    Officials in Eureka - the largest city in Humboldt County - said supermarkets and the Bayshore Mall were closed because of toppled shelves and other minor damage. Traffic lights were out, but residents quickly helped overworked police direct motorists.    Pat Tomasini of Ferndale was in the kitchen of her blue, two-story Victorian home when the quake struck.    "I heard the door pop, then the windows popped, then the dishes came flying out of the cupboards," Tomasini said. "I tried to run out the back door, but there was no porch there, so my husband took me out the kitchen window."     At the Humboldt County Fairgrounds, the Red Cross set up shelters for those who lost their homes and the Salvation Army was preparing meals for victims.    John Coleman of Redwood Memorial Hospital in Fortuna said the injured mostly suffered bruises and cuts, but some had chest pains and broken bones.    Tom Mullins, a spokesman for the State Office of Emergency Services in Sacramento, said damage and casualties might have been much more severe.    "It was a strong earthquake, but the area is relatively rural and relatively sparsely populated," Mullins said.    Gil Santiago, the pastor of Ferndale's Lutheran Church, was one of a few dozen people forced to find shelter because their homes were torn asunder by the earth's gyrations.    Santiago said the quake started a small fire at his church, located adjacent to his home, but that it was quickly extinguished by parishioners.    When the temblor struck, Santiago was in his house with his 13-year-old daughter, Robin.    "The hardest part was getting out of the house," said Santiago, 37. "The back porch was buckled so we couldn't get out that way. The front porch tilted up so we had to knock boards down to get out." --  Material from Associated Press was added to this report. ----------------------------- RICHTER SCALE      --  The Richter scale is a measure of ground motion as recorded on seismographs.    Every increase of one number means a tenfold increase in magnitude.    Thus, a reading of 7.5 reflects an earthquake 10 times stronger than one of 6.5.    Other readings: 3.5: Can cause slight damage in the local area. 4: Moderate damage. 5: Considerable damage. 6: Severe damage. 7: A "major" earthquake, capable of widespread heavy damage. 8: A "great" quake, capable of tremendous damage. Associated Press ---------------------------- VOICES      "Downtown is a disaster area. . . . My son and I were in a cafe, and it was literally destroyed. It was terrible. Lots of people were walking around in a daze." - Diana Lewis of Fortuna     "It was like a bees' nest, with people running every which way. . . . People should have been getting the hell out of there, but they were drawn to it like a magnet. People were whipping out their cameras. It just seemed bizarre to me." - Ray Azevedo, who drove into Ferndale a few minutes after the quake Associated PresCaption:  PHOTO1) AP: YESTERDAY'S EARTHQUAKE -- WEDNESDAY'S EARTHQUAKE (MAP NOT AVAILABLE IN ELECTRONIC VERSION)2) AP: THIS CAR IN FERNDALE, CALIF., WAS CRUSHED BY THE FACADE OF A BUILDING DURING YESTERDAY'S EARTHQUAKE
