LAS VEGAS - Ever since an earthquake blew out the windows of their office building and shook nearby Yucca Mountain last month, federal officials have had major problems convincing critics that nothing can go wrong at their proposed reactor waste burial site. The June 29 quake, which registered 5.6 on the Richter scale, caused $1 million in damage to a Department of Energy office building just six miles from where the agency plans to bury 77,000 metric tons of radioactive waste from civilian nuclear power plants.    In an effort to put the best possible light on the quake, Carl Gertz, director of the Yucca Mountain Project, issued a press release that began:     "At 3:14 a.m. on June 29th, scientists with the U.S. Department of Energy were provided with valuable information about the suitability of Yucca Mountain as a high level nuclear waste repository when a 5.6 earthquake awoke the Las Vegas Valley. . . ."     But Nevada officials who long have opposed the project were having none of such optimism.    Sen. Richard Bryan, D-Nev., said of the quake, "Mother Nature delivered a wakeup call to America's policymakers. Placing 70,000 metric tons of the most dangerous substance known to man, high-level radioactive nuclear waste, in an active earthquake zone defies common sense."     The department had argued that the project's location, Yucca Mountain on the northwest corner of the Nuclear Weapons Test Site, is relatively free of seismic activity and there hasn't been a major quake in the area in perhaps 10,000 years.    Over the last decade the federal government and the operators of the country's 111 nuclear power reactors have spent more than $6 billion on a plan to store the radioactive waste in a series of tunnels bored into the granite bedrock of Yucca Mountain.    The quake came at a particularly bad time for reactor operators. Their industry, severely shaken by the Three Mile Island meltdown of 1979, has been gaining new strength with growing concern over the role of fossil fuels in creating global warming.    Department scientists were dismayed to learn that the quake's epicenter was roughly 12 miles from the mountain where they plan to store the nuclear waste and just six miles from their front door.    The disposal project's critics immediately demanded that the scheme be dropped, a call Energy Department officials promptly rejected.    Robert Loux, director of the state of Nevada's Agency for Nuclear Projects, said geologists employed by the state have concluded that the earthquake exceeds the limits that the Energy Department had concluded would never occur at the proposed burial site.    "They have hard data right in front of them that shows that Yucca Mountain is a very dangerous place to put waste that will be around to haunt our descendants for hundreds of centuries to come," Loux said.    Now Nevada leaders say they will use the earthquake to press once again to stop the disposal project. Most of the work on the site has been done under congressional orders that took away state powers to regulate construction.    Loux said the original environmental impact statement called for disqualifying the site if evidence surfaced that significant seismic problems could arise. The site is designed to withstand a quake of 6.5 magnitude.
