CAIRO, Egypt - A strong earthquake shook Cairo this afternoon, causing some damage and injuries in the city center and reportedly knocking out electricity and telephones in parts of the country.    A fire-brigade officer said he had reports that buildings had collapsed.     Frightened people ran into the streets, and clouds of dust rose all over the city of 12 million.    The shock was felt 280 miles away in Israel.    There was no immediate estimate of the intensity of today's earthquake, which lasted about 20 seconds and was preceded by a loud roar.    At least five people were reported injured in the heart of Cairo.    The government-owned Middle East News Agency said the quake was felt in most of Egypt's 26 provinces. It said there were reports of "electric power cuts and telephone communications ruptures in a number of areas."     In Cairo after the tremor, a woman stood on a sidewalk, screaming. People sat together in a downtown square, tears streaming down their faces. Drivers stopped cars sideways and jumped out.    A man shouted  through a mosque loudspeaker and pleaded with the crowds to keep calm.     Dazed residents stood in alleyways in front of their homes, surrounded by rubble and too frightened to go back in.      A pool of blood was on Kasr el-Nil Street, a main thoroughfare, and a man was seen being shoved into a car to go to a hospital. Stones tumbled from some buildings, smashing at least four automobiles.     There was no obvious damage to the biggest buildings in the city center, such as the state radio and television center overlooking the Nile and the 30-story Ramsis Hilton hotel.      But there are many poor districts where families live packed in badly-built tenement blocks and building collapses are regularly reported.     Balconies collapsed on some small buildings and ambulances took a number of injured to hospitals.    A quake measuring 4.1 on the Richter scale shook Cairo in May but caused no serious damage or injuries.    Some Egyptians are concerned that the Aswan High Dam, about 400 miles upriver from the capital, might be in danger of earthquake damage. It holds back 310-mile-long Lake Nasser.    A serious breach of the dam would send a huge wall of water roaring through the Nile River valley, where almost all Egypt's 55 million people live.Caption:  MAPED WALKER / SEATTLE TIMES: EARTHQUAKE ROCKS CAIRO (MAP NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY)
