LOS ANGELES - The Reds and Dodgers didn't know there was an earthquake until after the game. The two teams played right through a quake last night, with Cincinnati winning 4-3 as a result of two errors by Los Angeles third baseman Lenny Harris.    A quake measuring 6.3 on the Richter scale shook Dodger Stadium and Southern California at 9:51 p.m. (PDT) in the bottom of the sixth inning. Although the stadium shook, play was not stopped and the players went about their business.    A crowd of 34,924 had little reaction and remained after the quake.    "What earthquake?" Dodger outfielder Eric Davis said. "If you all say it was an earthquake, then it was an earthquake. I've felt earthquakes before. I'm from here. Every earthquake they've had, I've been here."     Darryl Strawberry was walking up to the plate to face new pitcher Scott Bankhead when the quake hit.    A TV camera in center field swayed for about 10 seconds.    "I didn't feel an earthquake," Cincinnati Manager Lou Piniella said. "We won the game, that's all I care about."     Harris, who entered the game as a pinch hitter in the sixth and replaced Mike Sharperson in the field, misplayed grounders by Gary Green and Paul O'Neill in the seventh to help the Reds score the tie-breaking run. Pirates 2, Expos 0 --  MONTREAL - Kirk Gibson led off the game with a home run and Doug Drabek made it stand up with a five-hitter as Pittsburgh won its ninth straight game.    Pittsburgh is off to a 12-2 start to equal a team record. The last Pirate team to win 12 of its first 14 games was in 1914. Astros 3, Giants 1 --  HOUSTON - Chris Jones hit a two-run homer in the 12th inning as Houston beat San Francisco and moved into sole possession of first place in the National League West. Padres 9, Braves 4 --  SAN DIEGO - Bruce Hurst pitched 7 1/3 strong innings and San Diego hit Atlanta's Tom Glavine hard, handing the 1991 NL Cy Young Award winner his first 1992 loss.     Glavine gave up 11 hits in four innings. Cubs 9, Phillies 5 --  CHICAGO - Ryne Sandberg hit a three-run homer and Andre Dawson also drove in three runs as Chicago rallied to beat Philadelphia. Mets 3, Cardinals 2 --  NEW YORK - As a thick, white mist rolled into Shea Stadium, Eddie Murray hit his first home run for New York in the ninth inning to lift the Mets over St. Louis.
