MAUMERE, Indonesia - Survivors camping out in makeshift tents got meager handouts of rice today and rescuers battled bad weather and impassable roads as the death toll from a weekend earthquake rose to at least 1,584    Officials estimated tens of thousands lost their homes in Saturday's quake.    Many of the deaths occurred in Maumere, on eastern Indonesia's Flores Island, and on two small nearby islands that were swept by waves as high as 80 feet that the earthquake triggered.    A survivor from one of the islands, Pulau Bali, said islanders could not flee to Flores by boat because of the waves, nor could they take refuge in the mountains for fear of landslides, he said.    So they just turned to God and prayed, the survivor said. Nine hundred people on the island were feared dead, he said.    In Maumere (MAU-meh-reh), hundreds of injured people were being treated outdoors as hospitals and clinics overflowed.    Officials warned residents of this city of 40,000 people not to re-enter their homes. Families stretched plastic tarps between trees for shelter.    Large areas of the town were destroyed. Many brick walls were crumpled and wooden beams toppled to the ground. Roofs had gaping holes.    Officials planned a mass burial for many of the victims.    Families left homeless by the devastation said the government has provided only 2.2 pounds of rice per family per day.    "This is just not enough, for some of us have big families," Rachmat Rajun said.    A spokesman for the governor's office said the waves wiped out entire fishing villages on the two small islands near Maumere.    More than 200 bodies washed ashore in Lanatutu village in eastern Flores, the spokesman said.    Rescuers still had not reached some remote villages because bad communication, transportation problems and electrical blackouts hampered their efforts.    When the earthquake hit, patients at one hospital in Maumere were told to quickly go outside, and one 25-year-old woman gave birth to a baby girl under a mango tree, nurses said.    Occasional tremors were felt today on Flores, a poor coconut-growing area about 1,000 miles east of Jakarta and home to about 1 million people.    The earthquake, centered about 20 miles southwest of Maumere, measured 6.8 on the Richter scale, according to Indonesian officials. The U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif., measured it at 7.5 on the Richter scale.    An earthquake of magnitude 7 is capable of causing widespread, heavy damage, and an earthquake of magnitude 8 is capable of tremendous damage.    Some residents said they planned to join relatives on other parts of the island. They stayed away from their homes for fear of falling beams, and couldn't wait for the government to come through with emergency food and shelter, they said.    A spokesman for Gov. Hendrik Fernandez said ships were carrying volunteers, food, medicine and generators from nearby towns to the damaged areas.    The quake destroyed government buildings, schools, mosques, churches and shops in Maumere and Larantuka, another town on the eastern part of the island.    Indonesia is along the Pacific Ocean's volcanic "rim of fire" and is hit by many strong temblors each year.Caption:  PHOTOREUTERS: PEOPLE CARRY THEIR BELONGINGS FROM A DESTROYED HOUSE IN FRONT OF A MOSQUE ON FLORES ISLAND, IN EASTERN INDONESIA.
