OKUSHIRI, Japan - Weeping villagers searched for missing relatives today after a major earthquake ignited a firestorm and slammed huge waves into coasts as far away as Russia and South Korea. At least 65 people were killed    Ashes smoldered in the remains of hundreds of wooden houses destroyed by fire and waves on Okushiri, a small island in the Sea of Japan that bore the brunt of yesterday's 7.8 quake.      A house, one of many washed away by tsunamis (a Japanese word meaning "harbor waves," and used internationally to identify waves generated by undersea earthquakes, volcanoes and landslides) could be seen floating out to sea.      Police said 65 people in the region were killed, 82 were missing and 72 were injured. Kyodo News Service reported 71 dead and 169 missing.    On nearby Hokkaido, Japan's third most populous island, tsunamis more than a dozen feet high smashed villages, buckled roads and sucked cars out to sea with some occupants thought to be still inside.    Huge waves swept away wooden houses along the coast and destroyed small fishing boats moored at ports along the coasts of both Japan and South Korea.    In Russia, three people were reported missing after tsunamis as tall as 16 feet washed ashore in Nakhodka, near Vladivostok, a civil defense official told the Interfax news agency.    The Japanese, living square on the Pacific "rim of fire," face a constant threat of destruction from earthquakes and volcanic activity. Yesterday's quake was the strongest to hit the country since 1978.    It was centered 30 miles under the ocean floor and about 50 miles west of Hokkaido, population 5.6 million. Several strong aftershocks as strong as 6.3 on the Richter scale followed.    Meteorological Agency officials said many of Japan's quake victims did not have time to flee to higher ground before the tsunamis struck.    Worst hit was Okushiri Island, just 30 miles south of the epicenter. Police said 44 of those killed were on the island of 4,600 people, with 20 more deaths on Hokkaido and one in Aomori on northern Honshu island.    An entire hillside collapsed on the two-story wooden Yoyoso Hotel in the village of Inaho, killing at least five people and leaving about 20 missing. The public television network NHK reported six or seven people were rescued from the burning hotel.    About 300 houses burned in another of Okushiri's 10 villages - Aonae, at the island's southern tip.    "This is beyond belief," Okushiri mayor Yukio Koshimori said.    The island was without running water or electricity today, and its small airport was closed because of damaged runways.    Tsunamis slammed into Russia's Sakhalin Island and Nakhodka, washing a dozen fishing ships aground, but no injuries were reported, a Russian state emergency committee spokesman said.    Huge waves also wrecked about 60 small fishing boats along South Korea's east coast, more than 600 miles from the quake's epicenter, said Central Anti-Disaster Headquarters.    Along the west coast of Hokkaido, houses were knocked off their foundations, roads buckled, and store shelves emptied of their contents. Twelve people were missing in tsunamis in one town and 10 people were injured by collapsing houses in another, NHK said.     Junichi Konya, a city official in the coastal town of Esashi, said waves smashed cars against nearby rocks and sucked about 30 vehicles into the town's harbor. Some cars had their lights on and may have been occupied.    "This is the worst I've ever seen," he said. "The tsunami 10 years ago was nothing like this."     The Tomari nuclear plant, 56 miles east of the epicenter, was operating "as usual" after an inspection that revealed no problems following the quake, said Takahiro Kojima, spokesman for the Hokkaido Electric Power Co.    The quake was not felt in Tokyo, 500 miles to the south.    A 7.8 quake also struck Hokkaido on Jan. 18, killing two people, injuring 425 and causing widespread damage.    The Richter scale is a gauge of the energy released by an earthquake. A temblor of magnitude 7 is a major quake, capable of causing widespread heavy damage in populated areas.Caption:  PHOTOAP: A TOPPLED LIGHTHOUSE STANDS ON OKUSHIRI, JAPAN, AFTER AN EARTHQUAKE AND TSUNAMI WAVE STRUCK THE SMALL FISHING ISLAND.
