KLAMATH FALLS, Ore. - A moderate earthquake shook southern Oregon and northern California, killing a motorist in a rockslide, damaging buildings and cracking a highway bridge. A second person died of an apparent heart attack    The quake, measuring 5.7 on the Richter scale, struck at 8:29 last night and was centered 15 miles northwest of Klamath Falls, said the National Earthquake Information Center in Golden, Colo. The center originally had put its reading at 5.4.    "It felt like you were on a raft going over a rapid," said police Officer John Dees, who moved to Oregon from Los Angeles because he wanted to get away from earthquakes. "You could see transformers exploding over by the railroad tracks and up on the hill."     The quake, followed by two strong aftershocks, caused scattered power and phone outages in southern Oregon.    Five buildings in Klamath Falls were declared unsafe for habitation. The brick front of an old hotel now occupied by a restaurant and bakery collapsed, and bricks shaken from the front of the old City Hall buried a parked police car. Ten blocks were cordoned off to traffic downtown. Schools were closed.    Kenneth Campbell of Phoenix, Ariz., was killed when the quake loosened a 14-foot boulder above U.S. Highway 97 at Modoc Point, near the quake's epicenter, state police said. The boulder crushed the driver's side of his pickup. His wife was unhurt.    In addition, 82-year-old Anna Marion Horton of Chiloquin died late yesterday of an apparent heart attack. State police said her son told an officer that she had been frightened by the house shaking.    Highway 97 was closed by the rockslide north of Klamath Falls and also south of town, where a bridge over the Klamath River was cracked, said Janis Collins of the state Transportation Department.    West of Klamath Falls, state Highway 140 was closed because of a damaged bridge and state Highway 66, which was closed because of a rockslide, was reopened at mid-morning.    Oregon Gov. Barbara Roberts declared a state of emergency in Klamath County, enabling the Oregon National Guard to help authorities. The Guard was not called out immediately, however.    No significant damage was reported in northern California.       The quake was felt as far north as Eugene, more than 150 miles away, and as far south as Redding, Calif., 110 miles away. An aftershock measuring 5.5 on the Richter scale shook the area at 10:46 p.m. A second aftershock, measured at 4.8, struck at 11:15 p.m., said Pat Jorgenson, spokeswoman for the U.S. Geological Survey in Menlo Park, Calif.    In Medford, 75 miles west of Klamath Falls, patrons ran out of the Witham Truck Stop when the windows began shaking. At the Southern Pacific rail yard in Roseburg, about 80 miles northwest of Medford, two trains were kept overnight until crews could check the track for damage. Phone circuits in Klamath Falls and some in the Medford area were jammed for hours after the quake as residents called friends and relatives, said Jim Haynes, spokesman for US West.    A magnitude 5.5 quake can cause considerable damage in a populated area. A quake measuring 6 on the Richter scale can cause severe damage. Last spring, an earthquake of magnitude 5.6 struck about 200 miles north of last night's quake, damaging a bridge and several buildings in Oregon's Willamette Valley.Caption:  MAP: PHOTO1) AP: EARTHQUAKE (MAP NOT AVAILABLE IN ELECTRONIC VERSION)2) JIM CRAVEN / MEDFORD MAIL TRIBUNE: A CAR LIES CRUSHED UNDER BRICKS AND OTHER DEBRIS THAT FELL FROM A DOWNTOWN BUILDING IN KLAMATH FALLS, ORE., DURING AN EARTHQUAKE LAST NIGHT
