KILLARI, India - Funeral pyres flickered around dozens of villages today in southwestern India where a violent quake killed more than 20,000 people, many of them crushed by collapsing roofs as they slept    Soldiers in the village of Holi found three babies alive under tons of rubble today. "It was a small success but enough to motivate my boys to dig further," said Col. Promit Roy, leader of the rescue team.    Rescuers have been frustrated by incessant rain as they claw through rubble looking for the countless people believed to be trapped. Some villages were nearly impossible to reach because monsoon rains had wiped out roads and bridges.    An aftershock early this morning sent rescuers and survivors scurrying into the open.    The quake, India's worst in a half century, measured at least 6 on the Richter scale as it ripped through southwest India early yesterday.    Only when dawn broke hours after the quake did survivors begin to realize its severity: In addition to the thousands killed, at least 10,000 were maimed and countless others were trapped beneath rubble.    Police in Bombay, the capital of Maharashtra which was the worst-hit state, said 6,919 bodies were recovered before rescue efforts slackened at nightfall.    The Press Trust of India news agency, quoting official sources in Killari, put the death toll today at 21,000 and said the figure could rise by thousands.    Reporters in the quake zone saw village after village reduced to piles of black stones.    Sahib Rao Patil, a 20-year-old farmer, was one of the few survivors in Tarni, a village that had had 5,000 residents. Under a gray dawn sky today, he wiped his eyes as he watched the cremation of his father. He would be back in the evening with the bodies of his wife, two daughters and two sisters-in-law.    "All my family is gone. Who will I talk to now?" he asked.    Bodies were brought to hospitals in jeeps, buses and bullock carts. Others were burned near the homes. In some cases, bodies were stacked on top of each because of scarcity of firewood for cremation.    In Umarga, 18 miles south of the epicenter, 60 percent of all buildings were destroyed, killing about 3,000 people.    Many people in the quake zone lived in stone or concrete buildings that collapsed into death traps.    Offers of assistance came from many countries, including India's arch-rival, Pakistan. Britain and Israel offered to send trained rescue units.Caption:  PHOTOAP: RESCUE WORKERS DIG THROUGH THE RUBBLE IN A VILLAGE IN THE WESTERN INDIAN STATE OF MAHARASHTRA SEEKING VICTIMS OF YESTERDAY'S EARTHQUAKE, WHICH KILLED AT LEAST 20,000 PEOPLE AND INJURED THOUSANDS MORE. MANY VICTIMS WERE TRAPPED WHEN THEIR HOUSES COLLAPSED
