BOMBAY, India - The death toll in India's most devastating earthquake in a half-century rose to 10,000 today, state-run Indian television said.     The television quoted officials as saying about 10,000 others were also injured in the early-morning quake that flattened houses as their occupants slept in the western state of Maharashtra.     About 5,000 troops and civilian rescue teams pulled out hundreds of bodies from beneath crumbled houses in the worst hit towns of Umbarga and Khilari, two remote areas about 280 miles east of Bombay.    The quake, which measured 6.4 on the Richter scale, was the most devastating in the Indian subcontinent since 1935.    Debris crashed down on sleeping residents as the quake ripped through a large area of Maharashtra at 3:56 a.m. (3:26 p.m. Seattle time yesterday).    The shock of the quake awakened people from Bombay, in Maharashtra, to Bangalore and Madras, the largest cities in southern India. People fled their homes as floors, doors and windows shook.    No reports were available from Latur, the nearest city with a half-million residents and home of several colleges. Latur is about 250 miles southeast of Bombay, India's largest city.    The Latur district has a population of about 800,000.    In Gulbarga, 155 miles south of Latur, residents were up before dawn celebrating the festival of Ganesh and immersing idols of the elephant-faced god in water. The town's police chief, Jeevan Vaonkari, said people panicked after the quake struck.    "Everyone ran out of their homes. They are afraid that another big quake will come," he said in a telephone interview. A temple wall collapsed, injuring two people.    The largest death toll was reported from Umarga, a town about 270 miles southeast of Bombay. Sixty percent of the buildings in the town were destroyed, Raghunathan said.    About 80 percent of the village of Killari, which has 10,000 residents, was flattened, said S.P. Wathore, a minister in Bombay, the capital of Maharashtra and India's financial center.    Wathore said 25 to 30 villages in the area had heavy damage and casualties. Minor damage also was reported from villages hundreds of miles away.    Umarga is 18 miles south of the epicenter, which is near Maharashtra's southeastern border with Madhya Pradesh and Andhra Pradesh states. Killari is 50 miles north of the epicenter.    Telephone, electricity and water connections were disrupted as the quake rippled through the area.    Several aftershocks were recorded in the morning but were of low intensity and thought not to have caused more damage, a Seismological Office spokesman in New Delhi said.    In the state of Karnataka, south of Maharashtra, 13 people were killed in scattered villages, Press Trust of India reported.    Columns of army soldiers moved from three directions toward the disaster area with 1,200 tents, two bulldozers, three recovery vehicles and one crane to clear the debris, said army spokesman Maj. V.N. Tambekar.    About 1,150 soldiers reached the area within 12 hours of the quake and pulled out 600 bodies from Killari village alone, said Tambekar, who was contacted by telephone in the southern army headquarters in Poona.    He said four medical teams have reached remote areas and engineering units are equipped to set up drinking-water points. Government officials have started community kitchens.    The sugar cane and cotton-growing region stands over a geological formation called the Deccan Plateau, a table-top land rich in volcanic soil and solidified lava spread over thousands of square miles.    The U.S. Geological Survey in Washington said the quake registered 6.4 on the Richter scale.    The Richter measures the strength of an earthquake as recorded by the ground motion. Each increase of one whole number indicates a tenfold increase in the ground motion.     Seven hours later, a smaller earthquake measuring 5.0 on the Richter scale rocked West Sumatra's capital of Padang and surrounding areas.    The quake's epicenter was located around the Mentawai Islands, 430 miles northwest of Jakarta and 2,000 miles southeast of the Indian quake, the Antara news agency said.    The great San Francisco earthquake of 1906 has been estimated at 8.3 on the Richter scale. An earthquake with a magnitude of 6.0 to 7.0 can cause severe damage.    The May 31, 1935, earthquake in the Indian subcontinent killed 30,000 people and registered 7.5 on the Richter scale.Caption:  MAPAP: EPICENTER OF MAGNITUDE 6.4 EARTHQUAKE (MAP NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY)
