KLAMATH FALLS, Ore. - People should have more time to seek federal disaster assistance after the latest southern Oregon earthquake, Gov. Barbara Roberts said yesterday.     Meanwhile, an incomplete tally of damage to downtown buildings reached $220,000, and scientists revised their estimate on the severity of the quake to between 5.1 and 5.3 on the Richter scale.     Seismologists could give no assurances that the latest aftershock to a series of quakes that hit Sept. 20 would be the last.     "Because this area does not have a long history of earthquakes that we can trace, we don't know what kind of pattern to expect here," said Stuart Koyanagi, a geophysicist at the National Earthquake Information Center in Golden, Colo.     "I certainly wouldn't be surprised if there was a 4.5 that occurred" as an aftershock, he added.     It could be six months to a year before the earthquakes die down, said Ian Madin, seismic hazard geologist with the Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries.     The quakes have been centered in a rural area about 10 miles northeast of Klamath Falls.     In Salem, Roberts signed letters to the Federal Emergency Management Agency and the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) asking to extend by 30 days the deadlines for earthquake assistance offered after the Sept. 20 quakes. Yesterday was the deadline for small business loans.     The aid was offered after Klamath County was declared a federal disaster area based on the original quakes. The SBA has issued loans totaling more than $1.1 million, Roberts said.     Alan Barnes, director of the Klamath County Building Department, said reports of damage to downtown still were coming in and that the $220,000 figure didn't include additional damages to the Klamath County Courthouse, which has been closed since the first quake.     Repairs to the courthouse after the first quake were estimated at more than $3 million.       Police yesterday allowed traffic to resume on Main Street, which had been shut off over the weekend because of fears of falling bricks.     About 40 homeowners have called to report damage to their houses, said Rosie Parkhiser of Klamath County Emergency Services.     Roy White, president of the Association of Independent Insurance Agents of Klamath County, said most companies have imposed a 30-day moratorium on new policies in Klamath County.
