The earthquake that hit southwest India had a moderate magnitude of 6.4, but it occurred in a densely populated region of weakly constructed homes.    Therein, experts say, lies the reason for the high death toll that government officials yesterday said may exceed 30,000.    "For an earthquake of that size there was no reason for so many people to die," said Sri Krishna Singh, a seismologist at the National Autonomous University of Mexico in Mexico City.    The September 1985 quake in Mexico City had a magnitude of 8.1, yet the death toll was 4,000.    "If it had happened someplace else where there were not so many people, and where the houses were well-built, there would not have been so great a tragedy," Singh said.    To make his point, Singh noted that on Thursday, the same day as the Indian tragedy, an earthquake of exactly the same measurement struck the Pacific coast of Mexico near the state of Chiapas. There were no deaths or injuries reported in the sparsely populated area from that earth movement, Singh said.    The key to preventing earthquake casualties is good solid construction, said Singh, who lives in Mexico but was born and raised in India where he said most homes are made of adobe.    In Southern California, which like Mexico suffers relatively frequent quakes, another seismologist said wood or reinforced masonry  is the best protection against severe earthquake damage.    The quake-ravaged towns of southwest India obviously had neither, said Stephen Salyards, a research geophysicist at the Southern California Earthquake Center, located at  UCLA.    "From the television pictures I've seen, there are a lot of collapsed structures, which would lead me to believe a lot of the buildings did not have structural reinforcing," Salyards said.    Wooden homes are good, Salyards said, because they are flexible and have nails to hold them together. Mortar and bricks are asking for trouble, he said, unless they are reinforced with steel rods.    Southern California had few anti-seismic building-code requirements before the 1920s, the expert said. Then came a 1925 earthquake in Santa Barbara, killing 13 people, and one in Long Beach in 1933 resulting in 115 deaths, he said.    "That's when municipalities started acting upon this and implementing codes for seismic-resistant structures," he said.    Salyards said that Southern California still has many older buildings of unreinforced masonry. He said the cost of reconstructing those buildings would be exorbitant. "It would be impractical, particular for a country like India," he said. ------------------------------------------------------------------- How to help victims in India The India Association of Western Washington is establishing a trust fund to assist victims of Thursday's earthquake in India. Send donations, which will be forwarded to the American Red Cross and social workers in India, to the India Association of Western Washington, Earthquake Relief Trust Fund, P.O. Box 404, Bellevue, WA 98009-0404. For more information, call Ashok Bhattacharya, 874-6253, or Prem Kumar, 643-4834.Caption:  PHOTOAP: A WOMAN BREAKS DOWN YESTERDAY AFTER SEEING THE BODIES OF RELATIVES KILLED BY THE EARTHQUAKE IN  SASTUR.
