OKUSHIRI, Japan - The toll from Japan's deadliest earthquake in years climbed to 100 today as hopes faded of finding survivors in the rubble of burned homes, sunken cars and a collapsed hotel. Ninety-three people were reported missing.    More aftershocks today rocked northern Japan, where huge waves generated by Monday's quake swept scores of cars out to sea. Six fresh shocks were recorded this morning; the initial quake measured 7.8 on the Richter scale.    Japan's Meteorological Agency broadcast tsunami warnings within five minutes after the quake hit Monday night, but many victims had no time to reach higher ground.    Prime Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, facing parliamentary elections in four days, flew to this northern island today to inspect the damage.    The earthquake was centered 30 miles under the Sea of Japan, about 50 miles west of Hokkaido, Japan's northernmost main island.    Okushiri, a tiny island 30 miles southwest of the epicenter, took the brunt of the temblor, which matched a 7.8 quake in January that was the strongest to hit Japan in 25 years.    Most of the deaths Monday occurred on Okushiri. In fishing communities, villagers searched for missing relatives, while others huddled in the collapsed remnants of their homes.    The wreckage was strewn with twisted buses, overturned cars and family photographs.    Villagers carrying sticks and blankets formed shore patrols to look for bodies.    Thousands left homeless by the quake took refuge in temporary shelters. In the island town of Aonae, many residents slept in their cars.    In a crowded gymnasium, families spread bedding on the wooden floor and lined up their shoes outside the door. Old women, babies and young mothers huddled together, some of them sobbing.    The island was without running water or electricity, and officials were bringing in drinking water and other supplies by boat today.    In shock, people poked through a vast field of smoking rubble that had been a neighborhood of 600 homes in Aonae.    "I never had much, but what I had, I lost it all," said Fujiharu Hatsuzuka, a 67-year-old squid fisherman, walking around a pile of smoking ashes that had been his wooden house.    Police said 151 people were injured in the quake and resulting fires and tsunamis, Japanese for "harbor waves," that hit as far away as South Korea and Russia. In all, 284 houses were destroyed by waves, and about 300 houses were burned in fires triggered by the quake.    In the coastal town of Esashi, frogmen grimly searched for people trapped in dozens of cars that were swept into the harbor. Cranes mounted on barges hauled cars and debris out of the bay.Caption:  PHOTO
