MOLALLA, Ore. - The earthquake that jolted people awake along a 300-mile stretch of the Pacific Northwest should open the region's eyes to the potential for disaster, geologists say.    "This is a wake-up call," said Ian P. Madin, a seismic-hazard specialist for the Oregon Department of Geology and Mineral Industries in Salem, Ore.    Geologists believe a subduction quake, involving the convergence of the Juan de Fuca and North America plates off the Oregon and Washington coasts, could measure up to 8.5 on the Richter scale.    Said seismologist Craig Weaver, regional director of the U.S. Geological Survey's Pacific Northwest Earthquake Program in Seattle: "It is time for Oregon and the rest of the region to prepare for a much larger earthquake. We are poorly prepared for a major earthquake anywhere in the region."     Yesterday's quake, which struck at 5:34 a.m. and measured between 5.3 and 5.7 on the Richter scale, apparently occurred along the Mount Angel fault, discovered just five years ago. The quake was centered near Woodburn, about 30 miles south of Portland.    Just a few weeks ago, state and federal geologists confirmed two other faults directly beneath downtown Portland.    The faults under Portland could cause considerable destruction, said geologist George Keller, a vice president of Oregon State University in Corvallis. Similar faults exist beneath Seattle.    Keller said the region's residents "may have been lulled into a false sense of complacency."      Yesterday's quake may have taken care of that.    Toppled chimneys and broken windows were widespread in towns near the epicenter.    In Salem, about 15 miles south of Woodburn, the marble walls of the Oregon Capitol rotunda cracked and the 10-ton gold-plated figure of a pioneer atop the Capitol dome twisted an eighth of an inch.    Two walls separated from the roof of the historic St. Mary's Catholic Church in Mount Angel, and bricks fell from the 200-foot bell tower.    On the coast at Cannon Beach, sirens wailed and citizens were advised to seek higher ground in case a tsunami - a giant wave caused by submarine seismicity - followed the quake. About 500 tourists and residents got in their cars and fled town before it was learned the quake was centered inland instead of offshore. ---------------------- UW SEEKS PUBLIC'S HELP ----------------------      --  The University of Washington Geophysics Program is asking the public's help to determine the local effects of yesterday morning's northern Oregon earthquake, centered about 30 miles southeast of Portland.     The results will be used to predict damage from major quakes.     The UW is asking Times readers to respond to the following questions, even if you did not feel the earthquake. Responses should be mailed to Earthquake Survey, Geophysics Program, AK-50, University of Washington, Seattle, WA 98195. 1. Where were you during the earthquake, which occurred at 5:34 a.m. yesterday (Thursday, March 25)? Please describe the location either by street address (including city and state) or the nearest cross streets. 2. Were you in the open, in a car or in a building? If a building, how many floors did it have and what floor were you on? 3. What effects did you feel? Describe the sensation. Was it barely felt? Strongly felt? Was it hard to stand? Not felt at all? 4. How were surrounding objects affected?  (Rocking cars, dishes rattling on shelves, furniture or other objects shifting.) Describe any damage to buildings or surrounding land.
