LOS ANGELES -  The "Big A" sign inside Anaheim Stadium is down. The scoreboard and Jumbotron video-replay screen are in ruins.    The stadium, home of baseball's California Angels and the NFL's Los Angeles Rams, received an estimated $3.4 million in damages from yesterday's earthquake that rocked L.A.     The quake also prompted the postponement of last night's Sacramento Kings-Los Angeles Lakers NBA game in Inglewood. The Lakers arrived in Seatttle last night and will play the Sonics there tonight.    "It's the scariest feeling I've ever had," Sacramento forward Wayman Tisdale said.    Anaheim Stadium is farther from the quake's epicenter than most of the Los Angeles area's stadiums and arenas. Yet, it was the only one to incur significant damage.    Bret Colson, an Anaheim city spokesman, said the insurance deductible is $6.25 million, meaning the damages will not be covered.    Anaheim Stadium is about 50 miles from Northridge, which was believed to be the epicenter of the quake. The large "A" sign outside the park, a familiar symbol of the stadium, appeared undamaged. But inside, the quake tipped over the facade in the left-field corner, the pointed A-line structure leaned precariously over the upper deck, and billboard debris was scattered across upper-deck seats.    Santa Anita in Arcadia, northeast of Los Angeles, went ahead with its horse-racing card, attracting a crowd of 17,500.  The track  had minor damage.    A college team that was out of town during the quake - the Cal State Northridge men's basketball team - cut its road trip short. The Matadors, who lost 100-85 at Colorado last night, decided to return home and postpone tomorrow's game against Air Force at Colorado Springs.    "I don't think anybody wants to be here right now, as beautiful as Boulder is, as Colorado is," Northridge Coach Pete Cassidy said. "There's a tremendous concern on the part of all of us - we want to go there and help.Caption:  PHOTOAP: THE EARTHQUAKE TIPPED THE FACADE IN ANAHEIM STADIUM'S LEFT- FIELD CORNER, LEAVING THE "A" SIGN LEANING OVER THE UPPER DECK.
