BOGOTA, Colombia - Rescue workers started delivering food and clothes yesterday to 1,000 refugees who had not eaten in the five days since being stranded by an earthquake and avalanche, the Red Cross said    In the dozens of villages buried by mudslides in the Cauca and Huila regions in southwest Colombia, the search for survivors continued, with helicopters plucking groups of people off remote hillsides and mountaintops and flying them to mass evacuation points.    The federal government was unaware that many of the hamlets belonging to the Paez and Guambiano Indians even existed before an earthquake struck last Monday night, unleashing a wall of ice and mud.    Emphasizing that their estimates are vague, disaster officials say as many as 1,000 people may have been killed and 13,000 left homeless; the government has reported only 269 confirmed dead, while a regional prosecutor said his office had counted 589 bodies.    Many village cemeteries were engulfed by mud, leaving health and disaster officials struggling to bury the dead.    The stench of decomposing bodies has alarmed survivors and officials, who say the quake area may have to be fumigated to prevent disease, El Tiempo reported.    Most of the people have gathered on the Caloto plateau, an evacuation point near the obliterated village of Caloto in the Cauca region, are wearing the only clothes they now own. Sacks of flour were brought in by rescue teams to provide sustenance during the day and serve as pillows at night.    Families, and in some cases entire hamlets, share black plastic tents pitched along one end of a field.    In one tent, 20 orphaned boys greeted a visitor with wide, frightened eyes. Some were on the verge of tears.    Inhabitants familiar with the Caloto area have accompanied the police in the search.    Riverbanks where communities once flourished are now entombed in hard mud rising as high as 90 feet. On the mountain plateaus, small groups of brightly dressed Indians frantically wave white flags at passing helicopters.    The Paez and Guambiano Indians here are still divided over whether they want to leave the area, which has been theirs "for longer than we can calculate," said Miguel Capaz, a Paez leader.      Many resisted being plucked from their homes and had to be persuaded to accompany their friends to rescue points.    "Some of the people we spot on the mountains disappear when our helicopters arrive," said Col. Bernardo Millan, whose army contingent is overseeing disaster relief efforts here. "They have never heard the noise, and they are scared."     The earthquake leveled their houses, and the avalanche devastated their farms. A combination of the two destroyed a 17th-century Roman Catholic Church in Caloto that sheltered their most prized relics.    As they await word of the fate of families and friends, panic has gradually given way to sadness.    Informing a crowd of villagers that the government planned to evacuate them to a safer area, one Indian leader here told his people: "We will have to leave. There is no question." Silence greeted the announcement.    Friday, spirits brightened a little after President Cesar Gaviria flew to the Cauca region and agreed to meet all of the Paez and Guambiano demands.    The government promised to relocate both Indian communities, allot them new land as reservations in safer areas, pardon their mortgage debts and build new schools and health centers. A big cheer went up.    But when the speeches were finished, a somber mood set in once again as rescue officials asked the Paez and Guambianos to form lines in front of their plastic tents.    One relief official gasped as she tallied the results from a group of 40 people. "They tell me that another 40 are missing," she said.    Scattered statistics like these have made disaster officials skeptical of the official toll of 269 confirmed dead; even national officials say the final toll may exceed 1,000.
