LOS ANGELES - The deadly earthquake that rumbled through Los Angeles on Jan. 17 has unleashed an outburst of eating among normally health-conscious Angelenos.     In the restaurant at the upscale Los Angeles hotel where Robert Deery works, the waiter-actor watched as diners tossed aside their usual wheat-berry toast and decaf. They were going for the most decadent breakfasts on the menu.    "Suddenly, it became eggs benedict with extra hollandaise sauce, a fruit plate and a heftier portion of hash browns. Everybody did it. It amazed me," he said.    "It's always the opposite. People order and say, `Don't give me the hash browns.' "     While some earthquake survivors lost their appetites completely in these post-quake days, others describe their eating habits as, well, like a pig. And with plenty of chocolate, if you don't mind.    "I call it end-of-the-world eating," Deery said. "We're all talking about it."     Weight? Who cares? Cholesterol? Get outta town. Eat, drink and be merry for tomorrow we may . . . well, never mind, that's too depressing. Here, have a doughnut and think happy thoughts.    "People are saying, `What the hell, let's live for today,' " said Dr. Joel Yager, professor of psychiatry and bio-behavioral sciences at the University of California, Los Angeles.    Under normal circumstances, many people are what Yager calls "restrained eaters," always exerting a certain amount of willpower.    "What happens in the face of a crisis, that ability to sustain an organized willpower is compromised," he said. "Some of the urges that have been inhibited all along are no longer inhibited. People start living on a much shorter-term time line. They say, `I might as well have some gratification.' "     Yager gave two reasons: "One is, `I feel I need something to keep me going, to feel good.' The other thing is, `I don't know if I'm going to be around in a month anyway. What difference does it make what I look like?' "     The good professor gives permission to indulge.    "Realize it's OK, it's natural," he said. "Don't feel guilty about it."     Deery isn't alone in noticing the mass quantities of food being consumed lately.    "Everybody's been doing this, everybody," said Nicole Riddle, hostess at the International House of Pancakes in Encino. "I find myself eating since I've been here after the earthquake. I've been on a really good diet - chicken and fish.    "This morning, I had four pancakes with butter and a gallon of syrup on top of it."     Riddle is watching her customers ask for a lot of side orders to accompany their already big breakfast dishes - bacon, sausage, a stack of hot cakes - preferably with the really sugary blueberry compote and a big mound of whipped cream nestled on top.    "And lots of shakes - chocolate shakes. I've had a lot of to-go shakes. They've never done that before," she said.    Kathryn Baker, owner of the venerable Paty's in Toluca Lake, opened her restaurant hours after the temblor struck but had to close two days later because she ran out of supplies.    "They were really ordering a lot of food," Baker said. "They feel it's their last supper, like they may not get a chance to eat again. The desserts were very heavy. It's interesting, isn't it? It was to hell with the diets and cholesterol."     Waiters at the trendy Pinot Bistro in Studio City are moving a lot of desserts, too, according to general manager Doug Flohr.    "No one is promised tomorrow," said Flohr, summing up the sentiments of his patrons. "The resolution at the end of the year was voided as of 4:31 a.m. on Jan. 17."     Deery, the sometime-actor who waits tables at the Mondrian in West Hollywood by day and Vitello's in Studio City by night, noticed his customers ordering more appetizers.    "It was almost a celebration, a celebration of being alive," he said.    Or maybe they were uneasy the Big One would hit before the main course arrived and they didn't want to face it on an empty stomach.    "People who never drank, drank," Deery said. "Understandably."     Ditto at Pinot Bistro.    "The one thing I've noticed the most is a lot of champagne sales," Flohr said. "People were toasting, `Thank God we're alive. We survived another one.' A lot of self-preservation comments were made."     Fortunately for most, this binge-binge cycle probably won't last until the next natural disaster.    "It doesn't mean people are going to go whole hog forever," said UCLA's Yager. "It's short-term. After the first wave of being unsettled passes, people will regain their self-control."     It's simply stress eating, said Mary James, a manager at Weight Watchers of California.    "The earthquake is a major stress, and stress, obviously, is one of the reasons why people will tend to overeat," James said. "It's a way to quiet down the stress, it's a way not to think about what's happening.
