No thoughtful person can reflect on the California earthquake without asking serious questions about the rationality of the world and the love and goodness of God. Why must there be this catastrophic eruption that brought death and incredible destruction? And why were some spared while others died      Creation is a curious mixture of stars and snakes, of beauty and poison, of trade winds that aid commerce and tornadoes that tear up towns and strew the ground with lifeless bodies. How devastating are the "acts of God" - those direct, sudden and irresistible actions of natural forces that cannot be forseen or prevented.     So many of the tragedies of life seem meaningless and unnecessary. Yet with a responsible use of the brain the Creator gave us we can come to conclusions that enable us to believe in the rationality of the world and the love and goodness of God. Every ill that falls on human life is traceable to four factors working singly or together.      1. We live in a law-abiding universe. Respect for God's unbending laws and adherence to them is a mark of maturity. We do not expect God to alter or suspend laws to save life. We use the minds God gave us to learn the physical laws of our world and to govern ourselves accordingly. We have already learned much to save us from some of the devastation and give us better plans and programs for protection in areas where we know it will come. Law is our ally.     2. We believe in the evolutionary nature of the world and of our own personal lives. We are introduced into an unfinished world and called on to help complete it. Through trial and error, this often brings pain. In the process, as we struggle, we are called to faith and valor toward something better. Indeed, isn't that what life is all about? If we were born physically strong, morally good, greatly talented and fully educated, life would be pretty dull.     3. We have the privilege of choice. God has granted us power to choose our attitudes and our actions. We are not marionettes pulled by the strings of circumstance with no ability to shape our own conduct. God's power is limited by granting us freedom to make our own choices. Much of the pain and suffering we experience comes from the unwise choices we make. It is unfair to blame God for these choices. Lucky and happy, indeed, are those who are born with the humility to choose to pay attention to leaders who have traveled the road before - mentors they can admire and trust who know well the risks involved.     4. Another source of suffering comes from the intermeshed relationships of human life. We are not a world of separated individuals, but are woven together by loyalty, love and mutual need into friendships, homes, and local and world communities. Occasional isolation may be desirable, but we do not wish to be alone for long periods of time. It would be a cruel world if we were continuously separated from associations that give life meaning and purpose. Much that we know that is good in life comes to us from the lives of others. No fair-minded person accepts all of the assets of interdependence without recognizing that liabilities and suffering may come to us through others by accident or intent. It is man's inhumanity to man that ma kes countless thousands mourn. The challenge is to conduct ourselves so that we are part of the answer and not part of the problem.     These four factors account for the suffering and tragedy on Earth, but if you had the power to eradicate any one of them, would you care to do so? It is interesting, too, to notice that complete devastation brings people together in a way that lesser problems do not. God moves in a mysterious way  His wonders to perform He plants His footsteps in the sea,  And rides upon the storm. Judge not the Lord by feeble sense,  But trust him for His grace; Behind a frowning providence  He hides a smiling face. Blind unbelief is sure to err,  And scan his work in vain; God is His own interpreter  And He will make it plain. - William Cowper (1731-1800
