VLADIVOSTOK, Russia - Dozens of strong aftershocks today rattled the remote Kuril Islands, already reeling from a powerful earthquake that left thousands of people homeless.    Rescue teams began setting up tent villages for those whose homes were destroyed by Tuesday night's earthquake, and made preparations to evacuate children to the Russian mainland.    Island residents fear that the aftershocks, which seismologists say will last for days, will generate deadly new tidal waves. Tuesday night's 8.2 quake unleashed waves as high as 9 feet high that swamped coastal areas and hurled boats onto land.    Within the past 24 hours, as many as 60 aftershocks were recorded in the region with magnitudes between 4.5 and 7 on the Richter scale, according to Russia's Ministry for Emergency Situations.    There were conflicting reports about the casualty toll, and damage to power and telephone lines complicated assessment of damage.    President Boris Yeltsin, in a statement expressing his condolences to the victims' families, said at least 10 people died. But disaster officials said today that only four deaths were now confirmed.    Authorities concentrated their efforts on freeing those believed to be trapped under rubble, particularly seven people buried beneath a collapsed hospital on Iturup Island.    One of the hardest-hit areas was the regional capital of Yuzhno-Kurilsk.    "Log houses fell apart as if they were doll houses, and a few brick buildings remained intact only externally," said the Moscow daily Komsomolskaya Pravda.    "In Yuzhno-Kurilsk, not a single house escaped undamaged," the newspaper said. "Even the solid buildings of the city administration are shaky and on the verge of collapse, should another tremor occur."     The city was left without drinking water and electricity, and all moorings were destroyed, said Karl Smolikov, an emergency situations ministry spokesman in Moscow.    Rescue crews from Moscow, Siberia and the Far East flew to the islands north of Japan  yesterday to begin evacuating the injured and help restore services knocked out by the earthquake.    Japan offered to send aid, but so far Russia has made no official appeals for outside assistance.    The southern Kurils, which stretch between Japan's Hokkaido island and Russia's Kamchatka Peninsula, are controlled by Russia but claimed by Japan. The Soviet Union seized the islands from Japan at the end of World War II.    The southern Kurils are home to about 50,000 Russians, including several thousand soldiers.     On Hokkaido, Japan's northernmost main island, police said 228 people were hurt, but none seriously.  Most of the injured were cut by broken glass and did not require hospitalization. No one was reported killed.    The quake cracked Hokkaido's roads, caused gas leaks and flooded streets.    The quake - which lasted more than a minute - was centered 13 miles beneath the floor of the Pacific Ocean, near the southern end of the Kuril Island chain and 650 miles from Tokyo.     The Richter scale measures the magnitude of a quake. Each increase of one number means a tenfold increase in magnitude; Tuesday's 8.2 reading registers as a "great" earthquake, capable of tremendous damage.
