LOS ANGELES - Rain overnight made life even more miserable for thousands of earthquake refugees living in National Guard tent cities and raised the threat of mudslides on fire-stripped hills.    "What's happening to California?" said Juan Galvez, staying in one of the six tent cities in the hard-hit San Fernando Valley. "It's too much now. The earthquake, the riots, the fires and now the rain."     The rain, however, moved out of the area before dawn today. There were no immediate reports of major mudslides.    Quake victims braced for more misery on the roads, too: All but 65,000 of the Los Angeles school district's 640,000 students were due back in class today, meaning more traffic on and around the crippled freeways.    At Tent No. 48 on a baseball field in West Hills, Guillermo Ibarra was one of about 20 occupants trying to stay dry during the downpour that began shortly after nightfall last night.    "The water comes in under the walls," said Ibarra, leaning his mattress against a pole in a fruitless attempt to keep it out of puddles forming on the packed-dirt floor. "I guess I'll have to sleep standing up."     National Guard troops roamed the rows of tents, hammering down tent stakes loosening in the soggy ground.    But the rain succeeded where emergency workers failed, driving some refugees indoors despite their fear aftershocks would collapse their damaged homes. Ibarra and his son stayed in the tent, but the rest of the family fled.    "We're leaving because my 3-month-old brother is a little bit sick," said Rosalia Ibarra, 14. "We're going to my aunt's house. We have to, or he's going to get more sick."     Heavy rain also fell near Malibu, where the hills and canyons ravaged by wildfire last fall were susceptible to mudslides. Sandbags and plastic sheeting were handed out at parks and fire stations.    "We're talking about a couple of different disasters right now," said Mike Wofford, a National Weather Service forecaster. "Obviously there could be some serious problems with either one."     The rain knocked out electricity to about 6,400 customers, most in the valley. A Department of Water and Power spokeswoman said emergency repairs after the quake left the area vulnerable to intermittent outages.    The downpour also compounded the misery of evening commuters crawling north on Interstate 5. The Monday-morning rush went surprisingly smoothly, probably due in part to staggered starting times. At the end of the day, thousands headed for home at the same time, and I-5 turned into a 9-mile-long parking lot.    Traffic was likely to get worse today with students from all but 76 quake-damaged public schools due back in class.    There was no way to tell how many would make it to class. Thousands are living in shelters, tent cities or with relatives or friends. But it wasn't expected to look much like a normal school day anyway. Teachers tossed out lesson plans in favor of letting the students talk about their fears.    At least 56 people died and more than 8,300 were injured in the 6.6-magnitude earthquake Jan. 17. Damage was put at $15 billion to $30 billion.    In a related development, Gov. Pete Wilson asked the federal government for $28 million to create temporary jobs for people left jobless by the quake. He wants to use the money to put people to work cleaning up and rebuilding roads and buildings.Caption:  PHOTO1) AP: A WEEK AFTER THE  EARTHQUAKE, B. PHILLY JOHNSON SELLS EARTHQUAKE SOUVENIRS YESTERDAY ON CRENSHAW AVENUE IN CENTRAL LOS ANGELES.2) AP: LOS ANGELES POLICE OFFICERS VICTOR COLELLO AND BARBARA WEBER EMBRACE AFTER FUNERAL SERVICES FOR OFFICER CLARENCE DEAN, WHO DIED WHEN HIS MOTORCYCLE WENT OFF A QUAKE-DEMOLISHED FREEWAY BRIDGE
