LOS ANGELES - The summer heat is among the hurdles USC's football team is trying to overcome as it gets ready for Saturday's opening of its season against Washington's Huskies at the Coliseum.    But the players are being asked to tolerate the heat only three or four hours a day.    Some workers who are getting the Coliseum ready for the USC and Raiders football seasons are working eight-hour shifts in temperatures 30 degrees higher than the players are asked to endure.    "The welders have had to put on space suits, which in this heat make them feel like it's 125 degrees," Don Webb said during a tour of the facility this week.    Webb is project manager of the renovation of the Coliseum, which suffered extensive damage in the Northridge earthquake Jan. 17.    Though his home is in Philadelphia, Webb for the past six months has been at the 71-year-old Coliseum almost daily, supervising hundreds of carpenters, welders, concrete and steel workers, painters and laborers.    For the last 3 1/2 months, with a work force numbering as many as 1,300 people at times - nearly 800 worked Monday - the renovation has progressed 24 hours a day, seven days a week.    "About the only days a full work force wasn't here were Memorial Day and the Fourth of July, and some work went on even on those days," Webb said.    The result, Webb said, is that the Coliseum "is the only stadium in Southern California that meets current seismic standards.    "That doesn't mean other facilities are in violation. Everybody meets the current code, but code means only a minimum requirement. Standards go way beyond that."     The 24-hour shifts will continue at least through the end of this week, Webb said, with new scoreboards scheduled to be installed Saturday.    Though the cost of the project has grown from an original estimate of $35 million to nearly $60 million, when USC plays host to Washington for the Sept. 3 opener, tickets for all 68,000 available seats will be on sale.    "A few weeks ago I thought it would be a miracle if we had 50,000 seats ready," Webb said.    "Now they could use all 92,000 seats if they wanted to."     The Raiders will open at home Sept. 11 against the Seattle Seahawks.    According to USC officials, tickets for every seat in the Coliseum will be sold only for the Notre Dame game on Nov. 26. For USC's five other scheduled home games, including the opener, many seats will be covered.    One of the more heavily damaged areas of the facility was a section of about 25 seats in the southwest stands, which fell through concrete halfway to the ground below.    That section is now intact, and cracks in walkways throughout the facility have been filled.    The historic peristyle, hard hit by the earthquake, is still being refurbished but will be complete by Sept. 3.    Fifty-six steel and concrete reinforcement beams, weighing a total of nearly 8 million pounds and with nearly enough concrete to support between 12 and 15 freeway overpasses, have been constructed to anchor the stadium.    Fans who have not been inside the Coliseum since the 1993 football season - before the earthquake - might not notice changes in the stadium bowl. The numbers and locations of seats and sections have not changed.    But the games will be played over new concrete subsurface, and the 24 columns which ring the peristyle have been hollowed and reinforced with new concrete.    "We felt from the start there would be unanticipated repairs and removing all the soil underneath the playing field and filling in those columns are two of the big reasons the cost went way over the original estimate," Webb said.    Construction techniques and equipment are much more sophisticated now, Webb said, than when the Coliseum was built at a cost of $800,000 between December 1921, and May 1923.    "In those days they filled in the columns with boulders, rather than with concrete," Webb said.    The cooperation of the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which is footing 90 percent of the renovation bill, has been paramount from the onset of the project, Webb said.    "Building a new stadium would have cost between $185-$200 million and just the plans would have taken eight months to develop, and the building would have taken two years," Webb said.    "With FEMA working with us, we've been able to get 30 months of work done in six months. (It) recognized the importance of this project because the Coliseum has historic landmark status."     Seven preservation societies also have provided input on the renovation. "As much as possible we've tried to retain the character of the original," Webb added.    Painting, landscaping and other detailing will continue throughout the football season.
