LOS ANGELES - After the earthquake snapped the freeways, Phyllis Solomon switched to public transportation.    Her one-way train-and-bus commute from home to work sometimes took more than four hours. Finally, she gave up this week and drove - cutting her commuting time in half.    "Public transportation is just not worth it to me," said Solomon, a 49-year-old legal secretary.    Transportation officials hoped that agonizingly long drives around quake-damaged freeways would succeed where advertising campaigns had failed and force thousands of Los Angeles residents like Solomon to give up their cars in favor of mass transit.    During the days following the Jan. 17 earthquake, the number of passengers riding commuter trains soared to an all-time high. But only two weeks later, ridership on one of the area's most affected trains dropped more than 50 percent as many passengers decided once again to drive.    Raising this question: If a magnitude-6.7 quake won't permanently change solo driving habits, then what will?     The answer, experts say, has less to do with improving mass transit than making driving so odious that Southern Californians would find it easier to take trains and buses. That, they believe, would require a slew of politically unpopular moves, effectively stripping the automobile of many of the unnoticed government subsidies that it has enjoyed.    It would mean, for example, eliminating free parking at places like shopping malls and libraries. Or instituting an odd/even policy so people drive only every other day. Or charging motorists a fee for using freeways during rush hour just as the telephone company charges higher rates for calls during business hours.    Such measures could level the playing field, making mass transit an acceptable alternative, experts say.    "People drive not because habits are hard to break but because it's more rational for them to do so - it takes less time and money," said Martin Wachs, professor of urban planning at the University of California, Los Angeles.    Technology currently exists that would allow cars to be equipped with a device that monitors the time of day that the car operates and whether it is on a congested roadway. In such a scheme, which would most likely have to be government-sanctioned, motorists on empty country roads would not be charged, but those on a freeway during rush hour, for example, would receive monthly bills.     While setting up a system to discourage drivers, transportation officials would have to simultaneously improve mass transit, experts said. This could mean offering more coordinated and frequent service on buses and trains as well as adding another option: vans that offered door-to-door shared-ride services.
