LOS ANGELES - Nearly 1,000 tired and desperate earthquake victims, many of whom waited in line since before dawn, were barred from a disaster aid center today.    Confusion reigned for a while at the Winnetka Community Center in hard-hit Northridge as police pleaded with federal aid officials not to make a bullhorn announcement that only people with appointments would be let in.    "We are trying to stop a riot here," said police Sgt. Bruce Cowan as about two dozen riot gear-clad National Guard troops armed with M-16 rifles patrolled the area.    After more than an hour, many people in line grudgingly boarded buses for other centers. Some resisted. "I'm not going to get in the back of a line," said Marcia Lannom of Northridge.    Police wanted more centers opened or additional aid representatives made available at the center for people without appointments.    It was the second day of trouble for Federal Emergency Management Agency disaster aid centers for people seeking state and federal earthquake assistance.    Thousands of people besieged the centers yesterday, with lines so long some people were bused to other centers. To cope with the demand, FEMA opened a 12th center today and urged people to call an 800-number for appointments rather than walk in.    At the Northridge center, near the quake's epicenter, people started arriving before dawn. By mid-morning, about 1,000 people without appointments stood in line.    Tempers outside were short even before people knew they weren't going to get in.    "I don't have a house. I don't have anything. I don't want an appointment," said Hollis Lanson of Granada Hills. He was among the first 100 people at the Winnetka Community Center today, three hours before opening.     The centers, opened yesterday by FEMA to help tens of thousands of Angelenos whose homes and lives were damaged by the quake, were designed as "one-stop" offices for disaster aid. There victims can apply for loans and grants, replace driver's licenses, seek tax relief from the Internal Revenue Service and even talk to a local tax assessor.    But inside one center earlier yesterday, those needing help first were interviewed by FEMA workers, a process that takes 20 to 30 minutes. No one got a check on the spot, although the interviews put applicants in the pipeline for loans and grants.    At the housing desk, workers weren't even accepting applications, just handing them out.     The centers were officially opened by FEMA Director James Witt and Housing and Urban Development Secretary Henry Cisneros, who pledged to expedite applications.    At the Winnetka Recreation Center in Northridge, people who waited all night were told at a housing aid desk run by HUD that no city Housing Authority representative was available to help them fill out applications.    Cisneros, visibly angered by the omission, grabbed a cellular telephone and called HUD officials in Los Angeles saying, "It's terrible, nothing has started. No processing is being done." He then called Los Angeles Housing Authority Director Donald Smith and asked him to send a representative to the center.    Some people in Northridge waited up to 12 hours in a line that stretched three blocks. Yesterday, 342 applications were taken.    There was some minor pushing and shoving at the front of the line when the place opened.    FEMA urged people to use its 24-hour telephone line. As of Wednesday, the telephone system had processed 6,910 applications and was taking 250 applications an hour. At Northridge, some complained lines were busy.     "We need more people," Gov. Pete Wilson said while visiting another jammed center in Santa Clarita.    Applicants who needed immediate assistance, such as food and housing vouchers, were referred to the Red Cross.    Across Los Angeles, an estimated 20,000 people are still without a place to live. The city is forming teams of priests, social workers and psychologists to urge people to leave parks and cars and move into shelters.    The National Guard planned to set up tents to shelter 6,000 people, many of whom are now in makeshift camps, possibly some time today, in rain-resistant canvas tents that can be wired for electricity.    In other fallout from the quake:     --  St. John's Hospital and Health Center in Santa Monica was evacuated and may be closed for three months. Two wings of the 500-bed hospital may have to be demolished.    --  About 36,000 households and businesses remained without water, 2,300 without electricity and 35,000 without natural gas today.    --  Thousands of displaced Spanish-speaking immigrants posed a challenge for relief agencies, which put out a call for Spanish-speaking counselors and tried to provide information in Spanish.    --  President Clinton released $100 million for repairing local, city and state roads.    --  FEMA said the Army Corps of Engineers has begun providing a million gallons of water daily at 10 distribution centers.    --  The death toll rose to 55. Information from Knight-Ridder Newspapers and Reuters is included in this report.Caption:  PHOTO1) LLOYD FRANCIS JR. / SAN JOSE MERCURY NEWS: VOLUNTEER LOURDES PAGANO, CENTER, SHOUTS AT DENNIS RUNYAN, RIGHT, AS TEMPERS FLARE AT THE FEDERAL RELIEF CENTER IN NORTHRIDGE NEAR LOS ANGELES YESTERDAY. SOME QUAKE VICTIMS SEEKING HELP WAITED IN LINE UP TO 12 HOURS.2) DOUGLAS C. PIZAC / AP: THE LINE OF PEOPLE SEEKING HELP AT THE FEDERAL EMERGENCY CENTER IN NORTHRIDGE YESTERDAY STRETCHED THREE BLOCKS AT TIMES
