SAN DIEGO - Some day, Californians may not have to worry about massive concrete bridges crumbling beneath their cars or crushing them during earthquakes.    The proof lies below three normal-looking highway ramps just north of Dodger Stadium in Los Angeles, researchers say. Two years ago, the ramps were upgraded to survive quakes - not with concrete or steel, but with the same lightweight, once-secret fibers used to make the stealth bomber.    And when the earth shook Jan. 17, the ramps held.    "What we have are the beginnings of an entirely new type of material for the civil-construction industry," said Frieder Seible, a University of California structural engineer. "Soon it won't be just steel, concrete and timber anymore."     So-called composite materials must prove they are durable and cost-effective before governments can routinely use them to build bridges, engineers say.    "They've shown they can work in the lab. But now we must see how they perform in the field," said Mohsen Sultan, a California Department of Transportation (Caltrans) bridge engineer. "Safety must be our primary concern."     Last year, Seible and a consortium of private companies won a $10 million federal defense-conversion grant to build the world's first bridge made entirely of composites. Construction on the 450-foot-long span, over Interstate 5 in San Diego, will begin in three years.    Sometime in the next two years, UC researchers will replace a concrete roadbed on an Interstate 80 bridge in Northern California's Sierra Nevada range with a section of composites.    The new roadway will make the bridge weigh less. It will better resist snow and road salt.    Initially, after the 1989 Loma Prieta quake in San Francisco, highway officials wrapped steel jackets around thousands of bridge-support columns. Steel keeps them from crumbling.    All but one of the eight bridges that collapsed during January's magnitude-6.7 Los Angeles quake were on a waiting list for the steel retrofit. Bridges that had already received the steel upgrade remained standing.    And so did the experiment in which the California Transportation Department had allowed a San Diego company, Hexcel Fyfe, to wrap composite materials, rather than steel, around 15 support columns in 1992.    The day after the quake, owner and chemical engineer Edward Fyfe inspected those columns just north of downtown Los Angeles, 20 miles of the quake's epicenter. "We took pictures," he said. "There was no damage."     Fyfe's company weaves fibers of glass and Kevlar - the material in bulletproof vests - into a flexible material that feels like cloth. When that material is dipped into an epoxy resin, essentially a strong glue, it becomes a hard shell.    Fyfe and some UC researchers believe that if Caltrans approved composites for seismic retrofitting now, the upgrades could be done more quickly and cheaply, by creating more competition with the companies that provide steel jackets.Caption:  PHOTOAP: THIS PORTION OF ROADWAY WAS MADE OF MUCH THE SAME LIGHTWEIGHT, ONCE-SECRET MATERIAL USED IN THE STEALTH BOMBER.
