Every Earth-science textbook has a chapter that discusses earthquakes, why they happen and where the fault lines are and, in some cases, includes photographs of the damage done by the shifting of the Earth. For most students, if they read the material and listen closely, they'll have a reasonable understanding of an earthquake    But with the help of a computer and CD-ROM player,  earthquakes can be brought right to the computer screen, complete with narration, film, pictures, charts and maps.    Sony Imagesoft and ABC News have recently teamed together to produce a computer CD program called "Earthquake." Narrated by Ted Koppel of ABC's "Nightline," the program takes you step by step through the major earthquakes of the 20th century.    You can see right on your computer screen ABC News video of the earthquakes and the massive damage done by nature.    The program brings to life the Oct. 17, 1989, Loma Prieta earthquake in California's San Francisco Bay area, which happened during the third game of the World Series. You can see and hear the ABC broadcasters as Candlestick Park in San Francisco begins to shake and players rush into the stands to get their families and friends.    Click on a newscast of the massive damage done to the Bay Bridge between San Francisco and Oakland. See a reporter talking about the collapse while watching an unsuspecting driver traveling along a lane on the bridge, then suddenly dropping out of sight. "Oh, gosh," screams the stunned reporter.    Move to the Jan. 17 earthquake in Northridge, Calif., and see ABC footage of the fires, the shopping-center parking structure collapse and rescue efforts.    The $60 CD has 40 minutes of video, including rare film from the 1976 Tangshan, China, earthquake that killed 240,000 people. The disc has more than 500 photographs and 270 maps.    In the text section, the program offers "Understanding Earthquakes" and "Preparing for Earthquakes."     Of course, you could learn about earthquakes from textbooks. But I doubt it would have the impact of seeing for yourself the earthquake and the devastation it causes.    That's the advantage of computer technology. And it's only going to get better.
