GOV. Mike Lowry needs to rattle the state's efforts to make bridges and roadways less vulnerable to earthquakes.     Maybe an executive temblor through the state Department of Transportation budget will shake loose more money than the speck now spent on retrofitting those structures.     The state spent $6 million in the last two years, and expects to spend $7 million in the next two. Such skimpy funding allows state highway crews to do only preliminary work on expansion joints in the span and open joints over piers. Left undone is reinforcement of bridge-support columns and footings. One thousand bridges are on the statewide to-do list.     Instead of immediately looking for new money, take a close look at how available funds are spent. A 21 percent increase gave the DOT a 1993-95 budget of $2.62 billion. That makes $7 million look all the more puny.     Lowry will be briefed this week on a 20-year plan for a full seismic retrofit that would cost $250 million. That does not include an estimated $250 million for the Alaskan Way Viaduct alone. Other major spans that await retrofitting are the Tacoma Narrows, Aurora and Ship Canal bridges.     Officials have twin responsibility for public safety and the economic integrity of the state. Vulnerable bridges are a threat to both. Damage to roads and bridges and the disruption it causes has a financial cost well beyond the immediate repair expense.     Lowry's dual challenge is to shake the money, and make the initiation and completion of the work a priority. Well-intended, bipartisan efforts by the Legislature to rouse the state bureaucracy have faded from memory when the California quakes have left the headlines. Call it react and forget.     The Seattle Water Department is spending $30 million over the next five years on reinforcing water tanks, pump stations, pipelines, and the Tolt Dam to prepare that system for a 7-plus jolt. The goal is to keep potable watering flowing and maintain pressure for fire fighting.     If a municipal system with a much smaller budget can make that kind of investment, the state DOT ought to be able to redouble its earthquake efforts.     Before a convincing case can be made for boosting the state gas tax a couple of pennies for this necessary work, the public needs to be shown a good faith effort has been made with existing dollars.     That has not happened.
