PORTLAND - It has been one year since an early-morning earthquake jolted the northern Willamette Valley awake. The biggest fear of emergency planners is the public will simply go back to sleep.    "The important part is preparation," said Donald Hull, the state's chief geologist. "Every day we wait to prepare we're one day closer to a devastating event."     Many Oregon homeowners have taken the warning sign seriously.    The percentage of homes covered by earthquake insurance has risen from 3 percent before the March 25, 1993, quake to 25 percent - the same percentage as California.    "The fact that there is the same percentage of Oregonians with quake insurance now as California tells me now that they are concerned," said Marianne Macina, spokeswoman for the nonprofit Western Insurance Information Service in Beaverton.    Nicknamed, the "Spring Break Quake," it measured 5.6 on the Richter scale. It shook bricks off the old high school in Molalla, damaged the 60-year-old Mount Angel Abbey, ruined buildings in downtown Newberg, and cracked the Capitol rotunda in Salem.    It marked the beginning of a year of seismic activity in Oregon that ended with the state leading the nation in the total number of significant earthquakes. Oregon also had the only quake-related death in 1993 - a motorist killed by a falling rock when a 5.8 magnitude quake shook the Klamath Falls area on Sept. 21.    Bigger quakes are expected, though nobody knows when they will come.    "Pick a day. It could be today, it could be 10 years from now," said Pat Jorgenson, spokeswoman for the U.S. Geological Survey office in Menlo Park, Calif.    Hull says the loss of life and property damage can be minimized. Strict codes for new construction and retrofitting older buildings at risk from quake damage could prevent widespread destruction. "The scientific consensus is that we will experience these big quakes," Hull said. "We've seen earthquakes of the same magnitude kill tens of thousands of people in other parts of the world just because buildings were poorly constructed."     Stephen Dickenson, a civil-engineering professor at Oregon State University in Corvallis, says homeowners with wood-frame houses built since the 1950s probably have the least to fear.    As long as the frame is securely bolted to the foundation, wood-frame houses should bend and sway with the force of a quake, said Dickenson, whose father's wood-frame house in California has survived major quakes near the San Andreas fault.    Chimneys and brick work should be reinforced, and water heaters should be secured with straps, but homeowners have little else they need to do to prepare, other than stock up on emergency supplies, including water and food, Dickenson said.    Overall, the state's emergency preparedness program is moving ahead quickly, according to officials throughout the state.    Newberg fire Chief Michael Sherman said the city recovered quickly from the earthquake last March because of planning and the quick response by emergency crews.    The quake did more than $650,000 in damage to city hall, a theater building and a bank at the town's main intersection, but there were no injuries and the damage was surveyed and inspected within hours, Sherman said.    Wade Lange, operations manager at the state Capitol, said repairs to the building and rotunda are expected to get under way this summer with a $4.3 appropriation from the Legislature. Reinforcements should help the building withstand the level of quake that damaged it last March, Lange said, even though it is impossible to make the structure earthquake-proof.    The Clackamas County sheriff's office of emergency management is holding a "Quake Fest '94" April 9 at Molalla High School, where expansion plans were speeded up by the quake that knocked bricks off the oldest buildings on campus.    Casey Marley, the emergency coordinator, says she thinks public awareness of earthquake danger is high statewide.    "Many people have taken this seriously," she said. "Much more than previously. There's nothing like a good jolt to shake up those people who say it can't happen here.Caption:  PHOTOSTEVE SLOCUM / AP: BARRICADES SURROUND MOLALLA HIGH AFTER THE '93 OREGON QUAKE. EXPANSION PLANS WERE SPEEDED UP BY THE QUAKE THAT KNOCKED BRICKS OFF THE OLDEST BUILDINGS ON CAMPUS.
