WASHINGTON - House and Senate bargainers reached agreement today on a compromise $8.6 billion package of aid for victims of the Los Angeles earthquake.    As a snowstorm buffeted the capital, lawmakers and aides worked out minor differences over the legislation in a session that took less than three hours. The House and Senate prepared to send the bill to President Clinton for his signature by this evening.    "They came in during a snowstorm to help a city that's been devastated by earthquakes. I'm gratified at how quickly and generously they responded," said Rep. Howard Berman, D-Calif., who represents part of the Los Angeles area and who watched part of his colleagues' negotiations.    After two days of debate that centered largely on deficit concerns, the Senate approved $8.6 billion in grants and loans on Thursday night for victims of the deadly Jan. 17 quake. The vote was 85-10.    The House passed its bill last week, and lawmakers for the two houses arranged a mid-morning meeting to try and work out differences in time to accommodate members of Congress eager to begin a 10-day midwinter break.    Afterwards, Sen. Barbara Boxer, D-Calif., thanked the Senate for a vote she said would lead the way to reconstruction and "economic recovery" in a state hard hit by recession as well as natural disaster.    The quake has been blamed for 61 deaths and property damage estimated at $20 billion. It also left tens of thousands homeless. Some E. coli found in beef study     Tests on thousands of beef carcasses found 85 percent of them were free of disease-causing bacteria, although four of those tested had a potentially deadly form of E. coli bacteria, the Agriculture Department says. The department found higher percentages of salmonella and other bacteria that can cause food poisoning.   Thorough cooking would destroy all the disease-causing bacteria, the study said. The department wants to require raw meat and poultry to carry labels with instructions on handling, cooking and storage.    The study was begun in October 1992, before an outbreak of poisoning linked to tainted hamburgers in the Pacific Northwest that killed three children. House backs S&L probe extension      The House has backed a two-year extension for the government to pursue civil charges against failed savings and loans, including the one involved in the Whitewater case. The House action yesterday means both houses have now endorsed extending the deadline through 1995.    Republicans were primarily concerned with the Feb. 28 deadline for filing actions against Madison Guaranty Savings and Loan, linked to the Whitewater real-estate venture that was partly owned by Bill and Hillary Clinton. Senate puts Talbott nomination on ice    The nomination of Strobe Talbott to be deputy secretary of state is on hold until Feb. 22 after Senate Republicans blocked a vote yesterday.    Talbott, the State Department's ambassador-at-large for Russia and the other former Soviet republics, has been criticized because of allegations that articles he wrote while a Time magazine correspondent were anti-Israel. The Senate Foreign Relations Committee approved his nomination 17-2 Wednesday.
