LOS ANGELES - People driven from their homes by an earthquake and by the fear of aftershocks poured into hastily erected tent cities yesterday as the government mobilized what it called the biggest urban-relief effort in U.S. history    The threat of rain prompted the evacuation of one crude encampment in a city park that lies in a flood plain.    At federal disaster-relief centers, long lines of angry people gave way to more orderly queues as word got out that Washington was processing applications, not dispensing on-the-spot assistance checks.    And in hard-hit areas of the San Fernando Valley and Santa Monica, scores of gawkers - in cars, on bikes and on foot - surveyed damage on a sunny afternoon.    "It's amazing," said Granada Hills resident Julie Gibbs, gazing at a collapsed section of the Northridge Fashion Center. "What if the mall had been open during the quake?"     One of the first to take shelter under canvas was Elvira Torres, 19, of Canoga Park, who spent a fitful night sleeping in a tent pitched in center field of a local high school's baseball diamond. But she considered a narrow cot and screaming babies an improvement over the previous two nights that she spent outside in a nearby park.    "It was cold. It was freezing, even though I had two blankets," said Ms. Torres, who fears returning to her damaged apartment while aftershocks continue. "But at least I have a cot and I'm not sleeping on the ground."     After last week's chaotic opening of Federal Emergency Management Agency relief centers, lines at the 13 centers were relatively short and orderly yesterday.    FEMA Director James Lee Witt and Housing Secretary Henry Cisneros told reporters at a disaster center in North Hollywood that problems had been worked out.    "We are now dealing with the largest mass assistance to people in an urban setting in the history of the United States," Cisneros said at a news conference. "Checks are already arriving at people's homes from the FEMA processing centers as we speak."     Richard Andrews, director of the state Office of Emergency Services, said that by early yesterday, 13,317 people had registered by toll-free telephone calls and in person at assistance centers.    Before the news conference, Cisneros strolled through the sprawling Valley Plaza Recreation Center, where National Guard troops erected tents for hundreds of homeless families.    The victims, most of whom speak little English, were desperate.    "Ninety-seven children got sick last night because of the cold - just here in this park," Ruth Sanchez told Cisneros as she held her 9-year-old daughter, who has an ear and throat infection.    Cisneros' response was firm.    "I tell you, totally sincerely - go to a Red Cross shelter," he said in Spanish. They agreed to go, and Cisneros gave them $5 for gas.    Art Agnos, mayor of San Francisco when the Loma Prieta earthquake struck in 1989, told reporters he was amazed at FEMA's improved performance. "This earthquake is twice as bad, and the federal response has been twice as good," he said.    National Guard troops spent yesterday pounding stakes and tugging guy lines, erecting tents to temporarily harbor those who have lost their homes - and the thousands who refuse to go back indoors until the aftershocks end.    The tents are intended to shelter 6,000 people. The exact number of people displaced by the earthquake is unclear: The Red Cross estimates 25,000 dwellings are uninhabitable. City officials estimate 14,000 people were sleeping in parks and thousands of others were camped in yards, parking lots and on the front steps of their crumbling buildings.    The quake, which measured 6.6 on the Richter scale, killed at least 55 people and did $30 billion in damage, according to very preliminary federal estimates.    Other developments yesterday:     --  The 13th FEMA disaster center opened, in South Central Los Angeles.    --  President Clinton released $283 million to help earthquake relief operations: $140 million for Small Business Administration loans and $143 million to cover FEMA activities.     To date, Clinton has authorized $639 million for loans, $41 million for emergency highway repairs and $143 million for FEMA. The administration has already advanced California $100 million for quake repair and $200 million through the Community Development Block Grant program, from funds that would normally not have been available until later this year.     --  Los Angeles County said it would aggressively enforce an emergency prohibition on price gouging. Consumers have lodged about 400 complaints, and the city attorney's office has delivered more than 100 hearing notices to businesses accused of inflating prices.     --  The Southland Corp. said it may revoke the franchise licenses of three 7-Eleven operators for price gouging after the Dallas-based company sent undercover buyers into the stores.     --  Inspectors continued checking buildings, finding damage to 3,600 of the 3,896 checked as of yesterday morning. They declared 529 buildings unsafe, including 361 homes and apartment buildings.     --  The Red Cross opened five new shelters, bringing the total to 36. The agency, which is sheltering 6,000 people indoors, is also putting up tents to shelter 3,000 people outside the centers who refuse to come inside.    Among the Red Cross donors was L.A. Party Rents Inc., which supplies tents for movie premieres and weddings.    "We called the national disaster relief and offered help," general manager Jerry Nehus said. "They called us yesterday and told us to get it going immediately to house 1,800 people by this afternoon."     Many of the people camping out were homeless partly by choice. Their homes are damaged but standing, but they are afraid to move back until the aftershocks subside.    The threat of rain prompted the city Recreation and Parks Department to evacuate refugees in a makeshift camp in Woodley Park, which lies in a flood-prone spot in Van Nuys.    About 2,000 people stayed at the park the night after the earthquake. The number had dwindled to about 250 on Friday night, and the rest trickled out yesterday without complaint.    After 24 hours without big aftershocks, many appeared content to go to a tent city or to return home. Margarita Gonzales said she was returning to her Van Nuys apartment after it was cleared by building inspectors.    "I feel very happy to go home," said Gonzales, who spent five "cold but peaceful" nights in the park with her husband and two children.    Rain also raises the worry of mudslides on hills denuded by last year's wildfires.    Mary Linross came to a FEMA center in Sherman Oaks seeking sandbags to protect her home. She'd picked up 25 empty bags - the limit - at a local fire station, but said she needed 200.      FEMA doesn't stock the bags, but they are distributed free at some city parks and recreation centers.    "We need to sandbag immediately," said Linross. "A house is coming down on top of the hill behind us.Caption:  PHOTO1) PERRY C. RIDDLE / LOS ANGELES TIMES: DEMOLITION EQUIPMENT ZEROES IN ON A DAMAGED PORTION OF HIGHWAY 118 IN GRANADA HILLS. REPAIRS TO LOS ANGELES-AREA ROADS COULD TAKE A YEAR.2) REED SAXON / AP: FRESH GRAFFITI ADORN A HEAVILY DAMAGED WALL OF AN APARTMENT BUILDING IN SHERMAN OAKS, CALIF.3) WILLIAM WILSON / AP: ONE-YEAR-OLD MARIA PEREZ PEERS OUT FROM THE TRUNK OF HER FAMILY'S CAR, WHERE THE DISPLACED RESIDENTS OF NORTHRIDGE SPENT THE NIGHT
