LOS ANGELES - William  Seavey's crusade can be summed up with his toll-free number:     1-800-OUT-OF-LA.    For 10 years, he has sermonized on the downfall of "the Los Angeleses, the New Yorks and the Detroits." He has devoted himself to telling people to move out of a city many weren't ready to leave.    But what with the crime, the crowds, the traffic - and of course the riots, fires, floods and earthquakes - Angelenos could be excused these days if they wondered whether Seavey didn't have a point.    Southern California, Seavey said in a news release he circulated after the Jan. 17 earthquake, is "the most dangerous urban area in the United States."      After the quake, Seavey shook into action. He dashed out 500 pieces of mail to San Fernando Valley residents, dropped off brochures at emergency shelters, wrote guest editorials for local newspapers.    Persuading people to leave urban areas is Seavey's mission, and helping them escape is his livelihood. And he's not the only one; entrepreneurs like Tom Evons and Constance See are players in the bugout business.    Last year, when 900 people packed a room in La Jolla to hear Evons give his speech on "Escape San Diego," Evons knew what his next move would be. He expanded his operation to include "Escape L.A." and "Escape San Francisco."     See promotes leaving any risky place. She sells a map of the United States emblazoned with the question, "Are you safe where you live?" It is overlaid with statistics on rapes, slayings, prison escapes, Superfund sites, breast-cancer rates, earthquakes and other recipes for a short life span.    "I'll show you where the cancer, crud and crime are across the United States," says See, who runs City Seekers out of her home in Olympia.    After broadcast appearances in Los Angeles and San Francisco last fall, See was barraged with phone calls, including 900 from Los Angeles and 700 from San Francisco.    About 15 percent of the callers went on to become clients. They paid See $25 to compile information on particular cities and $45 to be matched with their own personal Eden somewhere in the country.    Some would say that idylls are getting harder to come by. When Matt Holbert left Galveston, Texas, for Boise, he thought he was bidding adieu to urban clutter, gangs and graffiti.    Not so. Boise is beginning to grapple with some of the same "big city" plagues. Growth rates in Boise have been running at 6 percent for the past three years - 2 percent is about the norm.    "It if keeps growing at this pace," Holbert says, "we'll find a smaller city. But it's hard to get away from this growth."     At a recent rally to stop the building of a bridge across the Boise River, protesters sported T-shirts emblazoned with the word "Boiseangeles" enclosed in a circle with a red slash through it.    The same sentiment is widespread on the West Coast. About 65 percent of Allied Van Lines' 1993 California relocations were outbound, up from 58 percent in 1991. United Van Lines reported similar figures for 1993; in Los Angeles County, departees outnumbered arrivals by more than 2 to 1.    The subscription list for Seavey's quarterly newsletter has grown from 100 to 2,000 in three years, with the largest growth coming in Southern California.    "That's where the action is," says Seavey, a former resident of Los Angeles who now lives in Pahrump, Nev., population 10,000.    These days, he spends most of his time on the road, living out of his motor home and extolling the virtues of small-town life at each stop.    He sells all kinds of relocation accessories: audiotapes and books on everything from setting up a home-based business to "Selling Your Southern California Property When No One's Biting." He runs a "Meet, Match and Move" support group and oversees a network of "Hinterland Hosts," rural folk who serve as a welcome party to the newly relocated.    Seavey isn't sure how to react to others, like Evons and See, who have climbed on the get-out-of-L.A. bandwagon. On one hand, he says he's reluctant to give out any competitors' names, for fear of drawing attention to them. But then he adds:     "In some sense, the more the merrier. People need to know what the alternatives are to living in big, crowded, unsafe places. And that is our mission.
