Neil Megson scored a goal in the 80th minute to lift the 1995 A-League Champion Seattle Sounders to a 3-2 victory over Japan's Vissel Kobe of the Japan Football League in the Kobe Relief Fund soccer match at Memorial Stadium     Yesterday's match, played before 7,005 fans, marked the first time a professional soccer team from Japan has played in this country. All profits from the match will be donated to the victims of the earthquake that occurred Jan. 17, 1995, in Kobe, Japan. Kobe and Seattle are international sister cities.     "This match was a great ad for soccer," Sounder Coach Alan Hinton said. "It had all the spirit and energy of an international match."       With 23 minutes left, Sounder reserve defender Kieran Barton blasted a 33-yard shot into the right corner of the net to tie the score at 2. The assist went to Jason Farrell.     Just three minutes later, Megson's improbable winning goal came from the corner. He sent a bending shot toward the Kobe goalmouth that deflected into the back of the net off a pair of defenders.     Vissel Kobe took a 1-0 lead as striker Akihiro Nagashima slid a shot into a open net after a misplay by Sounder goalkeeper Marcus Hahnemann. Teammate Shawn Medved passed to Hahnemann from the corner and Hahnemann failed to clear the ball.     Medved made up for the gaffe and evened the score at 1 with a strong angle shot past Ryuji Ishizue in the 21st minute. James Dunn got the assist.     Nagashima, who has scored 60 goals in two seasons with the J-League's Shimizu S-Pulse, struck again in the 30th minute, scoring on a crossing pass from Thomas Bickel.       The match marked the last time Seattle fans can see Medved and Peter Hattrup; both starting midfielders are expected to join Major League Soccer. The new league, sanctioned by the United States Soccer Federation as a Division One professional outdoor league, starts in April in 10 U.S. cities. WWU women win      CHICO, Calif. - Former Redmond High School star Gina Sampson scored 25 points and grabbed nine rebounds as Western Washington's basketball team defeated Grand Canyon 70-58 in the final day of the Coslet Classic.     WWU, No. 16 in the NAIA Division I preseason poll, improved to 2-1.     WWU played without honorable mention NAIA All-America forward Shannon Grandbois. The former Woodinville High standout suffered a knee injury in the second half of Saturday's 82-76 loss to Chico State.     Shorecrest High graduate Kristy Eggen finished with 12 points for WWU. Notes      --  Linnea Jarvits scored two of her career-high 28 points with four seconds to play to give the Seattle Pacific women's basketball team (2-0) a 71-70 victory over UC-Davis (0-2) in the final game of the PacWest/NorCal Challenge on Saturday night at Brougham Pavilion.     --  The Seattle University women (3-1) went on a 22-7 run over the last 10 minutes to overcome Southern Oregon 84-65 in Saturday's Stratford Inn basketball tournament championship game.
