TOKYO - Repairing earthquake damage could cost tens of billions of dollars, but the ultimate outcome of this week's disaster could be a boost to Japan's economy, economists say.    Factoring in damage to rail lines, roads, and buildings, J.P. Morgan analysts say repair costs could go as high as $60 billion. Other estimates are twice that high.    But the long-term effects of heavy spending on reconstruction ultimately will outweigh earthquake losses, said economist Ron Bevacqua of Merrill Lynch.    Merrill Lynch predicts the net effect of the earthquake on Japan's economy will be neutral this year, and will boost total economic output by 0.6 percent in 1996.    "All economic activities - production, consumption - will stop for a few months. But the underlying demand will be huge, because people want to buy things but they can't because shops are damaged," said Goldman Sachs economist Mamoru Yamazaki.    Japanese law limits the total liability of insurance companies in the area to about $2 billion, so much of the reconstruction cost is expected to be paid by the government, private companies and individuals.    The government says it will release $1 billion to pay for reconstruction and may allocate more quake relief in a supplementary budget.     The relief effort could cause huge deficit spending by Tokyo, possibly putting upward pressure on world interest rates, The New York Times reported today.     Japan's central bank officials are faced with the dilemma of whether to tighten monetary policy to help offset the inflationary pressures of government spending, or keep it more loose in fear of hurting a banking system not fully recovered from bad loans of past years, the newspaper said.     "Japan is the only country in the world with substantial savings," William Sterling, an international economist at Merrill Lynch, told the newspaper. "Now it has a very pressing need," he said. That means much of the money that might have been invested abroad is now likely to stay in Japan.     Sterling said that for countries dependent on capital inflows from Japan, a likely result would be the need to pay higher interest rates to attract other investors and perhaps put pressure on their currencies.    One of the biggest economic blows to Japan from the quake will come from closing Kobe's port, Japan's second-largest after Yokohama. It handles about 10 percent of Japan's ocean freight. Some shipping executives said they were hearing estimates that the port will be closed from six months to three years because of damage to docks and loading cranes.    However, economists pointed out that since about 85 percent of the port's cargo is in containers that can be diverted to other ports, the impact on the nation's overall economy may not be great.    "The effects over the next six months can be minimized by rerouting imports and exports to other ports," said Bevacqua.    Kobe and nearby Osaka accounted for 4.5 percent of the Port of Seattle's 1993 Japanese trade volume of 13.3 million metric tons, Port spokesman Stuart Miner said. Kobe received $391.5 million worth of goods from Seattle and sent $2.5 billion worth to Seattle that year, he said.    Hyogo Prefecture, the hardest-hit district, accounts for more than 4 percent of Japan's economic output and nearly 6 percent of its mining and manufacturing production.    The paralysis of the region's transport systems delivered a sudden shock to manufacturers that rely on the "just in time" production system, which involves keeping low inventories of parts to increase efficiency.    Toyota Motor Co. suspended vehicle production at all 12 of its factories in Japan because of parts shortages. Honda Motor Co., Japan's largest motorcycle manufacturer, said its plant in Kyushu would close today for two days.    However, almost all of the factories were expected to be back in operation within days. Analysts said the quake isn't likely to make industrialists reconsider the "just in time" system. Analysts noted that such plants ordinarily have alternate suppliers in case of emergency. Information from Reuters and the Journal of Commerce is included in this reportCaption:  PHOTOKATSUMI KASAHARA / AP: THE SAGGING, SIX-STORY MITSUBISHI BANK IN KOBE, JAPAN, STANDS IN RUINS AFTER TUESDAY'S DEVASTATING EARTHQUAKE. WHILE THE QUAKE'S DAMAGE MAY TAKE YEARS TO REPAIR, ANALYSTS EXPECT THE SPENDING REQUIRED TO REBUILD THE AREA WILL HAVE A POSITIVE EFFECT ON JAPAN'S ECONOM
