California geologist Jim Berkland, who predicted Saturday's quake a week earlier on television and radio,  was lucky instead of smart, said Steve Malone, a geophysicist with the University of Washington's seismology la     Berkland based his prediction - which called for a "mild to moderate earthquake of 3.5 to 6 magnitude" to hit within 140 miles of Seattle between Jan. 27 and Feb. 3 - on a century-old theory that the gravitational forces that cause maximum tides can also trigger earthquakes.     The magnitude 5 quake hit here at 7:11 p.m. Saturday during the new-moon period the retired California geologist uses for his forecasts.     By his own admission, three of the six quakes Berkland predicted for within 140 miles of Seattle the past six months failed to occur. "I've hit three and I've missed three," he said.     He said a magnitude 4.1 earthquake near Tacoma in September and a 3.5 near Seattle in December fit his "seismic window" of predicted earthquake times, while predictions for August, October and November failed.     The reason he started predicting earthquakes near Seattle in August of last year, and in every month since, he admitted, is that he got his first three subscribers here to his $35-a-year newsletter. About 300 people subscribe in all, he said.     Geologists scoff that Berkland's predictions take in such a wide land area (a circle 280 miles in diameter), cite so many dates (eight days a month) and concentrate on such a frequent phenomenon (Oregon and Washington average about 1,000 earthquakes a year, and Berkland makes monthly predictions just for the three most earthquake-prone metropolitan regions on the U.S. West Coast) that he is capitalizing on random chance.     Berkland counters there are too many instances when major quakes have occurred when the earth, moon and sun are aligned for maximum tidal influences to ignore their contribution.     It is the gravitational pull of the sun and moon that causes the ocean tides. Berkland's theory, which dates back a century, contends the stronger pull of these neighbors when they are aligned could also trigger earthquakes otherwise ready to occur.     He cites three possible mechanisms: rising tidal waters forcing moisture into a fault and lessening friction, the weight of water sloshing back and forth in coastal areas such as Puget Sound every six hours, or the pull of solar and lunar gravity on the earth's crust, which does rise and fall to an imperceptible degree in response.     Geologists at a press conference at the University of Washington yesterday put no credence in his theory. They made available a 1981 United States Geological Survey (USGS) paper on "California Geology" that evaluated Berkland's theory and concluded:      "The seismic window theory fails as a reliable method of earthquake prediction." Earthquakes studied from 1969 to 1978 in the Bay Area occurred randomly and independent of tides, the authors said
