KOBE, Japan - In the crammed and chilly relief centers around this devastated city, cracks are beginning to show in the remarkable stoicism and endurance of the Japanese people. Many of them, coughing and sniffling with cold or flu, which have begun to sweep through the centers, bitterly complain about official inaction and their own grim living condition     "Japanese people are known for their endurance, but if this keeps up . . . there is going to be an explosion," complained Yoshiaki Saito, 45, an evacuee stuffed into a small classroom with his family of five at the Uozaki Elementary School.    As the aftermath of Japan's worst earthquake disaster in more than 70 years entered its second week, officials have managed to get through the initial trauma of mass death and injury, widespread shortages of medical staff and supplies, and hospitals disabled by the quake damage.    The severely wounded are being transported by helicopter or ambulance to hospitals in Osaka and other nearby undamaged areas. Supplies and medical volunteers are pouring into Kobe from around the world, although distributing goods evenly remains a problem and some camps still report shortages.    The earthquake that killed more than 5,000 people left more than half of Kobe without running water, say city officials. But the first of several public baths set up by Japanese troops opened late yesterday, and more opened today. At an elementary school in one of the western port city's hard-hit areas, parents, teachers and children soaked in communal bathtubs, set up in camouflage-green military tents at an elementary school playground.    A fifth of Kobe's population - 307,000 people - is living in tents and makeshift shelters set up in schools and government buildings.    As of today, the death toll from the quake stood at 5,073 dead, 61 missing, and 26,509 injured. Nearly 75,000 buildings were damaged or destroyed. A strong aftershock rattled buildings this evening, but there were no immediate reports of damage or injuries.    Shoichiro Toyoda, chairman of the Japan Federation of Economic Organizations, said in Tokyo today that rehabilitation costs would probably run higher than the $30 billion to $80 billion that has been forecast by government and private economists.    The government has announced tax breaks and low-interest loans to help quake victims. But opposition lawmakers, some of whom have demanded Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama's resignation, kept up a steady stream of criticism.    In Kobe, authorities condemned 1,268 quake-damaged buildings and began demolishing some of them with the help of Japanese troops. Officials are anxious to prevent more deaths and injuries from aftershocks.    There had been more than 1,100 aftershocks by today, including 109 that could be felt, government quake-watchers said.    Perhaps more ominous in the long term, however, are the mounting mental-health problems. Victims are beginning to show anger, depression and other signs of mental trauma common to disaster victims around the world - but Japan is virtually unprepared to deal with them, experts here say.    There is deep social resistance to the idea of therapy. "In Japan, people who see psychologists are viewed as crazy," said Takayoshi Miyazaki, a psychiatrist who has begun working with Kobe quake victims in the heavily hit Nagata section of town.    David Tharp, a mental-health consultant and medical journalist, said the Japanese emphasis on social homogeneity has helped stunt the development of counseling services.    Experts say the Kobe victims are struggling with acute shock that goes beyond the calamity of losing their homes and being thrown into lives of grim subsistence at relief centers with no running water or heat.    They are also reeling from the shock of seeing two deep-rooted beliefs shattered: that an earthquake would never occur in the Kobe area and that the government authorities Japanese tend to heavily depend upon would take care of them.    The government's reluctance to accept foreign aid - coupled with bureaucratic rules that have hampered relief efforts - is causing anger among the Japanese people.    Yet relief efforts tend to focus only on the material needs of victims, said Masaaki Noda, a psychiatrist at Kyoto Creative Arts College.    For now, health officials say they are overwhelmed with such immediate problems as overflowing toilets, rotting corpses, and fears that colds and flu could progress to life-threatening pneumoniaCaption:  PHOTOYOMIURI SHIMBUN / AP: KOBE CHILDREN RELAX IN A MAKESHIFT BATH TODAY SET UP BY THE JAPANESE SELF DEFENSE FORCE. BUS SERVICES TO THE BATHS WERE ARRANGED FOR SOME OF THE 300,000 RESIDENTS TAKING SHELTER FROM LAST WEEK'S QUAK
