BELLEVUE - Engineers have found more seismically unstable walls, stemming mostly from poorly placed or missing steel bars, at Sunset Elementary School and Sammamish High School.     Minor defects were also found on several other campuses.     Although none of the schools was found to have defects serious enough to force closure, and only Sunset Elementary requires immediate repairs, several other schools were found to be at greater risk in major earthquakes than was previously known.     They include Bellewood, Lake Heights and Robinswood elementaries and the district's warehouse and transportation buildings.     Lake Heights Elementary is leased to Lake Heights YMCA, and Robinswood Elementary is leased to Bellevue Community College.     The district began reinspecting buildings after engineers discovered that Chinook Middle School's concrete-block walls had been built without steel reinforcement. The Bellevue School Board immediately closed parts of the building and will move all 675 students to the former Hyak Junior High by Oct. 15.      Steel bars and grout are missing or were improperly placed in 35 walls at Sunset Elementary, 3810 132nd Ave. S.E., according to the findings of structural engineers Skilling Ward Magnusson Barkshire Inc.     Repairs at Sunset are recommended to begin this fall, but work is expected to be done after school hours with minimum disruption, said Ann Oxrieder, the district's community-relations director.  The work is expected to cost $300,000 to $500,000.     Other schools were found to be less able to resist earthquake forces and were expected to be downgraded on the seismic scale. With 10 the best rating, some have fallen as low as 3.     Defects detected:      --  Sammamish High School: Vertical reinforcement is missing or misplaced in corridor walls in the gymnasium. The school, which now has a seismic grade of 7, should be downgraded to 5, engineers recommend.     --  Bellewood Elementary: Steel bars were not properly placed in single-story buildings. Bellewood, with a seismic grade of 5, is expected to be downgraded to 4.     --  Lake Heights Elementary: Grout is missing in some areas, and connections between roofs and walls need strengthening. Not previously rated, it is recommended at 5.     --  Robinswood Elementary: Only a few vertical bars were installed, according to engineers' findings. Now rated a 4, engineers recommend it be downgraded to a 3.     --  Warehouse and transportation buildings: Vertical wall reinforcement is not clearly defined on plans, and the buildings should be seismically downgraded, engineers say.     The Bellevue School Board meets at 7:30 tonight to discuss but not decide options for Chinook Middle School.
