My firm provides seismic evaluations and related consulting services to institutional clients, such as the University of Washington. Our particular focus in this category has been the seismic stability of masonry and masonry veneer constructio     This experience has given me some insights about the seismic safety of many old Seattle school buildings. I believe that this issue has not been raised adequately in the pre-election discussions, and much confusion has been sown by those opposed to the school bonds, giving an impression that safety can be provided by some very limited and relatively inexpensive measures.     Thus, I'd like to offer my perspective, in the hope that you will take it into consideration in your own decisions and in your discussions with others.     First, while we have for years been advising our clients that large earthquakes will occur in this area, the recent mild jolt has hopefully added credibility to this. The recent devastation of Kobe, with more than 80,000 buildings destroyed or severely damaged, more than 5,000 dead and 23,000 injured, and 300,000 homeless at last count provides some glimpse of the potential danger.     Yet, the occurrence of earthquakes with over 10 times the destructive energy of the Kobe earthquake, or 1,000 times the recent Seattle jolt, can be virtually guaranteed, and the only uncertainty is one of timing.     Second, substantial improvements can be made to existing masonry buildings to increase their resistance to moderate earthquakes by such measures as tying floor and roof diaphragms to the walls, providing shear walls, etc.     However, these measures fall far short of providing anything approaching a reasonable level of safety when a significant earthquake hits, and in some cases, it is possible that increasing such interconnectedness may contribute to catastrophic failures by over-stressing the overall structural systems in high-magnitude earthquakes.     For many existing Seattle school buildings, there simply are no cost-effective ways to provide adequate safety, and re-building is the least expensive way to provide a far greater level of safety than any retrofitting can accomplish.     All three of my children have classes in Seattle School District buildings, and none of these buildings would fare well in a major earthquake. While it is my desperate hope that such a quake will not occur while they are in those buildings, I feel compelled to do what I can to prevent this for my children, as well as yours and those of future parents.     In my view, this issue of seismic safety has been woefully overlooked, and all the other considerations about maintenance, wiring, class size, etc., completely pale in importance in comparison. Paul Lukes Seatt
