The motivation behind doing an earthquake study on the Kingdome was prudent, honorable: So that when the most star-crossed of local sports facilities re-opened in November after the falling-tiles fiasco, people would know not only that the 65-million-pound concrete roof would not fall on their heads, but that the entire structure was soun     Problem is, studies can be as unpredictable as earthquakes.     Now that the truth is known about the Kingdome - that the columns holding up the seating would likely collapse if a Kobe-size earthquake hit Seattle - King County officials are faced with a dilemma.     Do they fix the columns promptly, and retrofit them to a level that not only ensures the safety of occupants but protects against a prolonged, or permanent, closure of the facility after a major temblor?      Or do they try to save some money, by performing the minimum upgrades and waiting to do them when the Kingdome goes through a general overhaul, such as the Seahawks' $120 million proposal?      "We have to ask, `Is this something the public wants us to do, and at what cost?' " said Frank Abe, spokesman for Metro King County Executive Gary Locke. "The public wants its money spent wisely."      Locke's office is inclined to wait, to the consternation of Metro King County councilman Pete von Reichbauer, who said the county has "a legal if not moral obligation to treat this (upgrade) as our highest priority."      He expressed concern that county officials are soft-pedaling the findings in the study and courting another financial disaster, like the $60 million in emergency roof repairs, by looking at no more than the minimum upgrades.     "We need to be investing the money on a worst-case scenario," von Reichbauer said. "Even if the building collapses with no one in it, the impact on us would be a nine-point on the financial Richter scale."      The final report on the Kingdome, prepared by the Seattle structural engineering firm of RSP EQE, formerly Ratti Swenson Perbix, is due out later this month.     But the preliminary reports released in April were not good. For the first time, Ratti Swenson Perbix identified in November seismic weaknesses in the interior and exterior columns, some frame beams and concourse beams.     Another report, by a Federal Way firm hired to monitor the $300,000 study, raised specific concern about the interior columns, finding "serious" deficiencies and judging their margin of safety to be "uncomfortably low."      The earthquake used by engineers in study is what seismologists believe would be a 1-in-500 years event, the standard used to analyze buildings. The earthquake, with Seattle as its epicenter, would be comparable in size to the 7.2-magnitude temblor that hit Kobe, Japan this year, and slightly larger than those that hit the Los Angeles and San Francisco areas in recent years, said John Hooper, an engineer at RSP EQE.     To keep from collapsing in that size earthquake, 80 of the concrete, interior columns need to be wrapped with carbon fiber, steel jackets or some other bracing material, Hooper said.  Even then, the Kingdome would meet only a Federal Emergency Management Agency standard called "Substantial Life Safety," which suggests that occupants would likely be safe in the building during a major earthquake but that significant damage could occur, closing the facility.     A blue-ribbon panel that was assembled last summer urged the county to aspire to a higher standard, called "Damage Control," which would help ensure that the facility would not be shut down for a long time. The panel noted the economic effects of closure, which would displace the Mariners, Seahawks and other events.     "Damage Control" is consistent with the codes that typical new buildings are held to, including the renovated Coliseum.     But county officials told RSP EQE to evaluate the Kingdome against the "Substantial Life Safety" objective, to the dismay of Dr. Frieder Seible, a member of the blue-ribbon panel and an expert on seismic retrofits at the University of California at San Diego. The Kingdome merits special attention because of its complex design, the lack of similar structures to compare it with, and its ability to hold more than 60,000 people, he said.     "Can you afford to have a major seismic event that would close the Kingdome?" Seible said. "With a limited amount of retrofit work ahead of time, you can minimize the consequences."      At the county's request, no cost estimates on retrofitting measures will be included in the final report, Hooper said.     But another structural engineer involved in the project, Bob Mast of ABAM Engineers, estimated in March that wrapping the interior columns alone could cost in the area of a "few million dollars."      The final report will not include projections on the damage that would result from an earthquake in the absence of retrofitting, Hooper said.     Few buildings are earthquake-proof, say structural engineers. Abe notes that the county courthouse and many bridges would also fare poorly in a major earthquake without upgrades, projected to cost more than $20 million.     Some areas of concern in the preliminary reports last November will be diminished in the final report. A major reason: a soils study finished in March that reduced the level of ground motion expected at the Kingdome site during an earthquake.     Although built on landfill that will liquefy in a major temblor, the Kingdome will experience less shaking than other buildings because the landfill serves to muffle ground motion, the study found. That means less stress on the structure.     The soils study was a minor victory for the original structural engineer of the stadium, Jack Christensen, who hasn't enjoyed the first comprehensive critique of his building.     "Every time there's an earthquake in the world, there's a lot of fussing around and the codes get more specific," said Christensen, now retired. "There's no way you can expect a 20-year-old building to meet every requirement. I'm not concerned because those requirements aren't even that clear."      At the same time, the notion of the Kingdome as a rock-solid structure is no longer valid. In 1982, Christensen predicted with confidence, "It gives me a good feeling to think about people coming to see the Kingdome in a few thousand years, like the Colosseum in Rome."      As recently as last November, even as the engineers were completing their preliminary reports, acting Kingdome director Dick Sandaas likened the Kingdome to the downtown bus tunnel, as one of the safest places to be in Seattle in a quake.     Now, it appears to be a building like many others of its era - worthy of good service, but, without seismic upgrades, not exactly where you want to be when that once-in-500 years event comes along.     When it comes to earthquakes, Washingtonians do not scare easily. They mostly accept the risks of living in a highly seismic area. The question before the county is how much to reduce that risk, and how soon, for a building that is unlike any other.     "When the experts disagree, I err on the side of caution," von Reichbauer said. "I'd rather us plan for the worst-case scenario than some rosy, pollyanna-ish version of what the Kingdome would be like in an earthquake."      Said Sandaas, "I still today don't have any problems with being in the Kingdome. But if you've got new information saying you need to do something, you go do it
