When an earthquake recently hit a downtown Seattle bank branch, office furniture was overturned, ceiling tiles littered the floor and blood-smeared Seafirst employees screamed.     "Help! I need help! Where's Michael? I need my baby!"      Financial officer Jim Dockstader gushed blood from the stump of a severed arm. Customer-service employee Colleen Lane had a broken arm and a dead child. Contract negotiator Dani Folsom had been impaled by a metal shaft.     The post-mortem assessment?      "I think it's great!" Folsom said.     She wasn't referring to the  pretend earthquake in a basement storeroom reconfigured by the Red Cross to look like a devastated office, but rather the swift rescue by newly trained Seafirst employees, who herded in to care for and console mock victims.     "We'd been preparing all week, building up confidence, and we all felt really good we could do it," said loan closer Nancy Lambert of the earthquake drill. "If I walked up to somebody bleeding, I'd know what to do."      Lane - a good actress at playing a hysterical mother - already has used her earthquake training to help a stroke victim.      That means geologic warnings may turn out to have unexpected payoffs around Seattle.     The last decade of geologic research has changed the scope of disaster that Puget Sound companies are preparing for. Previously it was expected the magnitude 7.1 quake of 1949 was about the worst the region could expect, and that the "Big One" was only a California concern.     Then scientists found geologic evidence of dramatic pre-pioneer upheavals, landslides and tsunami waves on the Washington coast and around Seattle, plus a major fault running right under the city.     Now they think Western Washington could be hit with an earthquake up to magnitude 9 or 9.5 - close to the biggest on record - every few centuries, plus on average a 7.1 quake every century and a 6.5 quake such as occurred in 1965 every 35 years. As a result of the new research, businesses that are critical to recovery are preparing.     Seafirst, for example, is spending $250,000 to train employees in first aid and search and rescue; to bolt furniture to walls and buy rescue equipment.     The goal is to be back in business with money available soon after a major disaster, explained Gennie Thompson, contingency planning officer. "You can't recover a local economy unless the banks are functioning," she explained.     Bank of America, the California-based parent of Seafirst, had 43 branches shut down by the Northridge earthquake of 1994 near Los Angeles. Within two days, all but 16 were open and 90 percent of the bank's automated-teller machines were operating, said spokeswoman Shannon Jones.     Seafirst wants the same kind of recovery here. At least 10 percent of the bank's 8,500 employees statewide are receiving 20 hours of training on top of basic CPR. The climax is the rescue drill in a wreckage-strewn room.     "I didn't know what to expect and it's hard to imagine," said team leader Joannie Foltz of the exercise. From fake blood to terrified moans, the mock earthquake gave the volunteer employees a better sense of the confusion and fear they would encounter. One drill took place in the dark to simulate the loss of electricity.     Employees are being asked to put together emergency kits to keep themselves alive for 72 hours after a disaster. Seafirst sells two such kits, one for $25 and another for $60.     A 15-minute video shows graphic footage of earthquake damage in Washington and California and simulates a quake in company offices. A four-page handout gives employees detailed instructions of what to do both at home and at work.     Safeco Insurance is another local business leader in earthquake preparedness. The Northridge earthquake that knocked out one of its branch offices in Los Angeles was a sobering lesson for Seattle headquarters, recalled spokeswoman Pat Hillis.     Employees were torn between reporting to work and caring for their families. One building was so badly damaged that critical records could not be accessed. A motel had to be rented for a substitute, and computers flown in.     Accordingly, the company has initiated a plan similar to Seafirst's, with employees getting extensive training. "We find it absolutely critical we stay in business," Hillis said. Policyholders who can't file a claim after a disaster tend to be very unhappy campers.     "We're not counting on the local public entities to support us," said Michael Carter, the company's business continuity analyst.     Besides training first-aid responders, evacuation wardens and area crisis managers, Safeco has stocked its offices with food, water and equipment and spent several million dollars earthquake-proofing its buildings. Sustaining such preparation may prove to be the most difficult task. Employees change, training gets stale, equipment is misplaced.     The intention, however, is to stick with it: With disaster scenes from Kobe and Oklahoma City fresh in their minds, workers said they were delighted to be getting some instruction.     "Many are very relieved that finally someone is doing something like this," said Seafirst's Thompson. Give us your ideas: If you know of a person or project making a difference - from fighting crime to cleaning the environment to helping kids - call the "Making it Work" voice-mail line, 464-3338, or write describing your nominee: c/o Bill Ristow, Seattle Times, P.O. Box 70, Seattle, WA 98111. Include a phone number.Caption:  PHOTOBENJAMIN BENSCHNEIDER / SEATTLE TIMES: SEAFIRST EMPLOYEE MIKE RUZDIS RESCUES A DOLL FROM PRETEND RUBBLE DURING AN EARTHQUAKE SIMULATION DRILL.
