KOBE, Japan - The pounding of jackhammers and wrecking balls is a constant backdrop, not the wail of sirens. Free lunches are no longer given out at the headquarters of local gangsters, who have returned to their usual endeavor    Three months after suffering Japan's worst earthquake in more than 70 years, Kobe remains a city of devastation. But among the flattened buildings and twisted concrete, this once-scenic port also presents a lesson in survival.    To those who were here when Kobe lay crushed and burning Jan. 17 - with more than 5,500 people dead and $120 billion in physical damage - the speed and extent of the recovery already made is striking.    But there have been negative surprises, as well. One of the most ominous was discovering the vulnerability of structures on reclaimed land, which is widely used in coastal cities of this crowded nation. On the national level, the government has proven less able to deal quickly with major emergencies than many Japanese hoped.    In the center of it all, however, the mood is one of determination.    After round-the-clock efforts, the bullet trains once again pass through Kobe linking Japan east and west, and the maddening traffic jams that halted even ambulances after the quake are gone.    Thousands who sat outside shattered homes bewildered and disheveled now rush to work every morning, their suits and dresses clean and neat. Children are back in their school uniforms, books in hand.    At City Hall there is a growing sense of optimism, a feeling that the real recovery question isn't whether, but when.    "We hope to have all the basics, the infrastructure, completely restored in another two years," said Koichi Yokoyama, an official at the Earthquake Damage Recovery Department whose office overlooks Kobe's still idle port.    Of course, for thousands of families, life will never be the same.    The quake forced more than 250,000 people to seek emergency shelter in school gymnasiums, community centers and tents on river banks. About 40,000, like Haruyuki Matsuoka, remain there.    Unlike most of the people who returned home once water and heating were restored, Matsuoka has no home to return to. His business, a public bath, was also destroyed.    "I still haven't got the foggiest idea what I'm going to do," he said, sitting alongside his wife and three small children in a park with hundreds of other homeless eating a soupy lunch provided by the government.    Kobe has erected 40,000 temporary homes and appropriated tens of thousands of existing, but unused, housing units. City Hall hopes to find more housing for the remaining refugees by summer.    Finding them jobs is another matter.    "It's difficult," said Yokoyama. "But we believe that the faster we can get the infrastructure back, the faster businesses will be able to start up again, and thus start generating jobs."     Because the Japanese archipelago straddles three tectonic plates and is one of the world's most earthquake-prone regions, the psychological jolt from Kobe is still being felt nationwide.    Bookstores across the country now devote shelves to manuals on quake survival, first-person accounts of the Kobe horror, predictions of where the "Big One" will hit next.    Tokyo, which in 1923 was hit by a quake and subsequent fires that killed some 142,000 people, tops many of the lists of most-likely spots. According to one theory of historical cycles, a major quake is due in the capital every 70 to 80 years.    Concerns over a perceived lack of political leadership have deepened the general anxiety.    Slammed for his administration's poorly coordinated handling of the Kobe emergency in its early stages, Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama has ordered reviews of contingency plans for everything from quickly ordering up emergency rescue teams to procuring recovery funds.    In the meantime, new problems have appeared.    Although economists had predicted rebuilding Kobe would give Japan's still-sluggish economy a boost, they now say the recent rise of the yen to a record high against the U.S. dollar could offset the quake-recovery impetus.    The stronger yen eats into the profits of Japanese exporters, and Murayama has been criticized for failing to slow its rise. Some political analysts believe that barring a dramatic improvement, he could be out of a job as early as this summer.    "The view that politics generally is not working properly, that it is incapable of making quick decisions, has quickly spread," said Kenzo Uchida, a well-known political commentator.    In government ministries, agencies and departments, the wheels of change are indeed turning slowly.    Hideaki Iwasaki of the Construction Ministry, which sets national building codes, said a major overhaul is in the works, but so far the main action has been the formation of committees and publication of interim reports.    Officials say that newer buildings came through the quake relatively well and that most of the total losses were older, often wooden, structures. Existing standards for overpasses, bridges and other raised structures are being cited as a point of encouragementCaption:  PHOTOSHIZUO KAMBAYASHI / AP: WORKERS MAKE THEIR WAY DOWN A STREET DURING KOBE'S MORNING RUSH HOUR, PAST EARTHQUAKE WRECKAGE, THREE MONTHS AFTER THE DISASTER.
