TOKYO - Prime Minister Tomiichi Murayama said yesterday that he gravely accepts political responsibility for the "sacrifice of more than 5,000 lives" in the Kobe earthquake but would remain in office to rebuild the devastated area and make Japan "a nation that is strong against disasters     Murayama made the comments in a news conference about recovery measures his government is taking to "give people hope for the future."     Reports that Murayama, 70, might resign  had spread through the capital.    Even though expressways and rail lines were crippled and more than 107,000 buildings destroyed or damaged beyond use, Murayama deployed only 16,000 Self Defense Forces troops to the disaster area - and only 2,000 on Jan. 17, the day the 6.8-magnitude quake struck.    Murayama said the inability of his office to obtain accurate information speedily about the scope of the disaster showed that Japan needs to establish "a sweeping crisis management structure."     He said he expects a Cabinet team to determine what is needed by next week. And he pledged to revamp Japan's anti-disaster plans and training programs.    But on the big questions of how much his government is prepared to spend to rehabilitate the Kobe area, and when the port city of 1.5 million people can expect recovery, Murayama said only that he is establishing two more committees to work with local governments and hammer out a plan.    He also refused to comment on damages to the area, which have been estimated at about $100 billion.    Murayama also said he has boosted the number of rent-free temporary housing units the government will provide by 10,000 to 40,000. More than 90,000 families have applied for the units.    Other government measures he mentioned included 2.5 percent loans requiring no collateral for small-business people; subsidies for wages of workers at damaged or destroyed enterprises, and tax cuts for individuals and companies.    A nationwide lottery will be held in April to raise an estimated $90 million for rehabilitation of the disaster area.      Private efforts have already brought in more than $450 million for the effortCaption:  PHOTOTOMIICHI MURAYAMA
