OKHA, Russia -  Alexandra and Sergei Rot were on the verge of killing themselves when the rescue workers going through the ruins of Neftegorsk finally heard their cries.     "Sergei had found a piece of glass and we were going to cut our wrists. Dying of thirst is a terrible death," said Alexandra, 23, from her hospital bed in Okha, just to the north of the doomed town on the Russian Far East island of Sakhalin.     The couple were saved by the back of the sofa they were sleeping on which protected them from concrete slabs that crashed down as tremor after tremor shook their apartment block.     "A slab fell straight on the baby and crushed her immediately," said Sergei of his 9-month-old daughter. He spoke in the monotone most survivors adopt when recounting the quake.     "I thought that only our block had collapsed and that we were the only ones left, that everyone had taken their things and gone," said Alexandra.     In fact the whole oil settlement of Neftegorsk collapsed in the earthquake early Sunday morning, trapping more than 3,000 people in piles of concrete slabs and twisted metal.    The body count now is 445 but the total is expected to be far higher.    "Soon after we fell I felt drops of water on my neck. I thought it was someone's blood. I was so afraid," said Alexandra. The couple  was rescued  yesterday afternoon after being trapped for more than 100 hours.     "On the first night, we could hear people working above us but they couldn't hear us," said Alexandra. "Then on the second night, there did not seem to be anyone."     Three times a day, the rescuers turn off heavy equipment and call for silence so they can hear cries coming from under the rubble. But by today, the voices had grown few and faint.     Power failures and lack of good equipment slowed rescue operations.     Sergei and Alexandra were among 32 recent arrivals at the hospital in Okha, the half-way house for wounded survivors from Russia's worst earthquake.     Doctors and nurses there work around the clock without running water to deal with a flood of wounded, which now is slowing to a trickle.     "It was terrible at the beginning," said Dr. Andrei Mushnikov, who had not slept for three days. "There were lots of badly injured people including children who I had to take to the mainland."      Hospital deputy chief Lyudmila Vanina said 10 people had died out of the 300 who had come through the hospital.     "We are the front line. Many patients have to be sent on to the mainland because we haven't got proper equipment to deal with severe trauma or burnsCaption:  PHOTOAKIO TANIGAWA / AP: WHITE SMOKE RISES FROM APARTMENT BUILDINGS IN NEFTEGORSK, RUSSIA, DESTROYED BY SUNDAY'S EARTHQUAKE.
