TOKYO - Centered safely offshore, the quake warranted only a sentence or two on the late-night TV news. But in scientific circles, its aftershocks are reverberating.    Four months after Japan's sixth-largest city, Kobe, was devastated by a powerful quake, researchers are wondering whether signs point to an even bigger jolt in store for Tokyo.    The quake in question was felt throughout central Japan on the night of April 18.    No damage or injuries were reported, and the quake was quickly forgotten in the din of news about the doomsday cult and the rising yen.    But a closer look has experts worried. The cause for concern: The epicenter was in one of the world's most closely watched areas of potential seismic disaster, the Suruga Trough.    "To researchers, it was a very important event," said Katsuhiko Ishibashi, the chief seismologist at Japan's International Institute of Seismology and Earthquake Engineering. "It was a very unusual quake."     With an estimated magnitude of 5.1, the quake was more than 100 times stronger than any other quake from a similar depth - about 12 miles - from the trough this year.    "It was an important indicator that a major quake could occur," Ishibashi said. "It is reckless to use the word omen, but I think the two are certainly linked."     Japan spent roughly $115 million on earthquake prediction last year. Since the Jan. 17 quake in Kobe, which killed more than 5,500 people, the government has ordered an even more intense effort.    Most scientists were taken by surprise by the intensity of the Kobe tremor, which had a magnitude of 7.2, and the extent of devastation it caused. The quake forced many experts to acknowledge that warning signs often cannot be recognized as such until after an earthquake has hit.    In fact, the deeper meaning of the April quake is a point of debate.    Disagreeing with Ishibashi, Japan's Earthquake Prediction Committee issued a statement this week saying the quake does not conclusively point to further activity. Trough may be on 100-year cycle     The Suruga Trough is closely monitored in Japan - one of the world's most seismically volatile countries - because it has been the source of devastating earthquakes roughly every 100 years since 1498.    One in 1707 was followed by an eruption of Mount Fuji that killed tens of thousands of people. The trough's last quake was in 1854, so many experts believe another disaster is well overdue.    Even more disconcerting is historical evidence that a massive quake in the trough could set off a series of seismic events nearby, possibly even directly under Tokyo.    Japan's worst quake this century, which killed 120,000 people in and around Tokyo in 1923, was preceded by a quake in the nearby Odawara area.    The Suruga Trough is an ocean-floor ravine created by the convergence of two tectonic plates - the giant slabs of rock that move across the earth's crust.    The meeting of the Philippine Sea Plate and the Eurasian Plate draws a line through Suruga Bay and runs on for an undetermined length inland. The Philippine Plate is forced underneath, pulling the Eurasian Plate down with it.    A strong earthquake along the convergence line of those two plates is what scientists fear most. According to the Earthquake Prediction Committee, last month's quake occurred within the Philippine Plate alone. Kobe quake seen as a signal     Seismologists believe the Kobe quake may have signaled the beginning of a period of activity in western Japan that could last for decades. Some have even singled out three or four areas likely to be hit next.    None of the predictions, however, places epicenters directly under any major urban center, and the activity in the west does not necessarily mean a similar period has begun in the east, where Tokyo is located.   A strong earthquake hit the northern Japanese island of Hokkaido yesterday. Police said four people were slightly injured.    The quake registered a preliminary magnitude of 5.6. It hit shortly after 7 p.m. (3 a.m. PDT) and was centered six miles below the earth's surface.     Another earthquake registering 4.0 on the open-ended Richter scale jolted Hokkaido again today, the Meteorological Agency said. There were no immediate reports of damage.     It was the 14th and strongest aftershock of yesterday's quakeCaption:  ILLUSTRATIONKNIGHT-RIDDER NEWSPAPERS: JAPAN: COLLISION ZONE: SOURCE: U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY; NATIONAL GEOGRAPHIC RESEARCH BY PAT CARR (NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY)
