Scientists plan to create the first permanent observatories at some of the most forbidding and fascinating places on Earth: the sea-floor volcanoes and superheated vents more than a mile and a half below the surface of the north Pacific     Oceanographers at the University of Washington and six other institutions announced yesterday that the National Science Foundation has agreed to long-term support of the observatories along the Juan de Fuca Ridge, an area of intense seismic activity 250 miles off the coasts of Washington and Oregon.    What that means, said UW oceanography Professor John Delaney, is that for the first time, scientists will be able to study the ridge and its inhabitants in a coordinated way, much the same as their landlocked colleagues do research at the volcano observatory at Mount St. Helens.     "We can begin thinking, scientifically, in terms of life cycles of volcanic processes," Delaney said. "If there is an eruption, we can follow the eruption and the products of the eruption to its completion."      The ridge is the boundary between two of the great plates that make up the Earth's surface - the Pacific Plate to the west and the Juan de Fuca Plate to the east. New sea floor is created as the plates slowly move apart and magma from deep in the Earth rises to fill the openings.     It's a region of frequent earthquakes and volcanic eruptions, eerie mineral formations and life forms vastly different from those found elsewhere on the planet.     Sea-floor vents are home to bacteria that thrive on high temperatures and chemicals that are poisonous to most living creatures. The bacteria, in turn, feed lush colonies of worms, clams and other sea life on a sea floor once thought to be sterile.     In the past, scientists have been able to make only scattered expeditions to the ridge because of limited access to submarines capable of making the deep dives. Also, each expedition usually was separately funded, with little or no coordination among the geologists, vulcanologists, marine biologists, oceanographers and other scientists interested in the site.     Under the Ridge Inter-Disciplinary Global Experiments program, scientists plan to set out a network of monitors and instruments to collect information, similar to the network of instruments that rings Mount St. Helens, Delaney said.      Unmanned vehicles eventually may be stationed near the ridge to collect samples or make observations, and the sensors may one day be linked to shore labs by underwater cable or satellite.    Such tools, along with a program of regular visits by surface research ships and manned submersibles, will let scientists study how the ridge and the life supported by the undersea vents change over long periods of time, Delaney said.    The program will concentrate on two sites: the volcanically active Endeavor segment, which is about 300 miles due west of Everett, and the Cleft segment, home to a number of strong hydrothermal vents about 250 miles west of Newport, Ore.    Among the questions scientists hope to answer are how often and how large the volcanic eruptions are, and whether they form a pattern; how magma moves from the Earth's upper crust to the sea floor; and how biological communities develop around the vents and beneath the sea floor.
