MOSCOW - A powerful earthquake rocked a large island off Russia's Pacific coast early yesterday, flattening a remote oil-producing town and burying as many as 2,500 residents beneath collapsed apartment block    Rescue workers reported hearing moans from under the rubble in the town of Neftegorsk, which bore the brunt of the 7.5-magnitude quake that belted Sakhalin Island while most residents slept.      The ITAR-Tass news agency reported today that 300 people were confirmed killed in the quake, with about the same number hospitalized. The report could not be independently verified. The casualty toll was expected to rise as rescue teams combed the site.    "I won't speculate on how many dead or fatally injured people may still be lying under the rubble," Lt. Col. Alexander Mikheyev said from Civil Defense headquarters in Yuzhno Sakhalinsk, the island's capital.   By early today, rescuers had recovered 39 bodies from Neftegorsk and taken 144 people to the hospital, according to Russia's Ministry for Emergency Situations.    Eleonora Budrina, a spokeswoman for the ministry, said that 2,500 people were unaccounted for and that many were feared dead or injured.      The quake, which struck at 1:03 a.m. Sunday local time, was centered just offshore near its thinly populated northern tip. Neftegorsk, population 3,500 and located 40 miles northwest of the epicenter, was destroyed. Other villages were damaged.    Raisa Mikhailova, municipal spokeswoman for the regional center of Okha, said 13 five-story houses collapsed in Neftegorsk, burying about 3,000 people. Hundreds of those buried later were saved, she said.    She said 224 injured people, including 42 children, had been brought from Neftegorsk to hospitals in Okha and Khabarovsk.    The Interfax news agency reported that a disco full of young people in a two-story building was destroyed.    In Okha, a town of 35,000 people about 55 miles north of Neftegorsk, balconies fell from two five-story buildings, and many houses were damaged.    The quake also fractured a 60-mile stretch of oil pipeline leading north from Neftegorsk to Okha, the head of the Sakhalin Marine Oil & Gas Co., Nikolai Borisenko, told the Interfax news agency.    A special plane left Moscow yesterday with a rescue team and equipment aboard. Camps were set up for those evacuated, and teams of medics and rescue workers were sent, ITAR-Tass said.    As aftershocks of up to magnitude 3.0 jolted the island, rescue teams throughout eastern Russia rushed to Sakhalin. But heavy fog reportedly prevented some of the 18 airplanes and helicopters from landing. First Deputy Prime Minister Oleg  Soskovets, who flew to Sakhalin with other officials last night, said the cash-strapped central government had allocated 30 billion rubles ($5.9 million) for emergency relief.    Sakhalin Island, about 4,000 miles and eight time zones east of Moscow, is rich in natural resources - oil, gas, coal, timber and fish.     Strong ties exist between the Northwest and Sakhalin Island. Business and political leaders in both regions have worked to promote trade, and several Northwest companies have been positioning themselves to participate in widely anticipated offshore oil and gas development.   Efforts to establish a link between the regions began even before the breakup of the Soviet Union; the first U.S.-Soviet business venture was established in 1975 between a Northwest fish-processing company and a Sakhalin Island fishing operation. Compiled from Washington Post, Associated Press, Los Angeles Times and Seattle Times reportsCaption:  MAPSEATTLE TIMES: RUSSIA (MAP NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY)
