WASHINGTON - It couldn't have happened at a worse time for Mexican President Ernesto Zedillo.    On the eve of his first official state visit to the White House today to meet with President Clinton, Mexico experienced an earthquake on its Pacific coast that killed dozens.    It was only last December, shortly after Zedillo became president, that Mexico suffered a financial tremor that has left its economy in a profound recession. The value of the peso collapsed, causing international investors to pull out.    Yesterday's earthquake appeared to be one Mexico should recover from in short order. And with ample U.S. help, the nation is rebounding from last December's economic temblor, say Mexican and U.S. officials. Zedillo's visit is meant to underscore just that message.    Zedillo comes calling on Clinton, his fellow Yale University alumnus, just days after the Mexican government announced it would prepay a $700 million installment of a $12.5 billion emergency loan from the United States.    The early payment was seen by some experts as the Mexican government's way of preparing for Zedillo's visit. It was also vindication of a sort for the Clinton administration.    The administration took the politically risky step earlier this year of arranging the loan package to bail out Mexico, despite heated criticism from many in Congress and the public.    The administration gives Zedillo, an economist by training, much of the credit for stabilizing his nation's economy. He imposed austerity measures that have contributed to its recession. For example, the government raised taxes to close a budget deficit and kept tight control of the nation's money supply.    Such measures have made the lives of many Mexicans miserable. But interest rates have fallen to 35 percent from about 80 percent earlier this year. Inflation was about 1.6 percent in August compared with 8 percent in April.    The North American Free Trade Agreement also kept the Mexican crisis from deepening, said U.S. Treasury Secretary Robert Rubin.    "What it (NAFTA) basically did was prevent Mexico from going back into the mode they went into in 1982 when they had a crisis," he said, citing Mexican moves to shut out imports.    "Remember, in 1982 they raised tariffs by 100 percent," which had the effect of pricing many U.S. goods out of the Mexican market, Rubin said. That had a negative effect on U.S. jobs, but NAFTA prevented the Mexicans from responding with drastically higher tariffs on foreign goods.    Clinton, 49, and Zedillo, 43, have formed a working bond by telephone cemented in part by the fact that they hail from the same generation of their countries' leadership.    But their meeting comes as questions are raised by critics on both sides of the border on important elements of the U.S.-Mexico relationship.    NAFTA continues to be unpopular with many in the U.S. at the same time that Mexican immigrants are targeted by anti-immigrant proposals like Proposition 187 in California. That proposal - now under court review - would prohibit many immigrants from receiving public services.    Meanwhile in Mexico, critics of the bailout exist. They blame the harshness of the recovery on the influence of the U.S. and the International Monetary Fund, said Delal Baer, a Mexico expert at the Center for Strategic and International Studies, a Washington think tank.Caption:  PHOTOJ. SCOTT APPLEWHITE / AP: MEXICAN PRESIDENT ERNESTO ZEDILLO ARRIVES IN WASHINGTON LAST NIGHT WITH HIS WIFE, NILDA PATRICIA ZEDILLO.
