IF YOU DO NOTHING ELSE . . . -----------------------------      -- Be prepared to spend 72 hours without utilities, medical help or communications. The Pacific Northwest is a geologically active region, and sizable if not catastrophic earthquakes are inevitable.     -- Strap your hot-water heater to the wall. An upright water heater is less likely to break its connection and leak gas after an earthquake, and it can be a source of drinking water through the hot-water taps.     -- Start an emergency kit and create a family emergency plan. -------------- OTHER MEASURES -------------- Structural safety      -- If your home is not subject to modern building codes, make sure the house is bolted to its foundation.     -- Strap gas appliances to walls or secure them to floors.     -- Know how to turn off gas, electricity and water. Have on hand the necessary tools. If you live in an apartment, know where your building's utility controls are and how to use them.     -- Evaluate each room. Ask yourself: If the residence began shaking, what would topple? How can I secure it?      -- Store household chemicals safely, preferably near the floor. Personal know-how      -- Know the safe zones of your home: away from masonry or large windows; in strong doorways, under major beams; in rooms without tall furniture or loose objects; beneath sturdy tables.     -- Hold a home evacuation drill. Have a plan for reuniting the family. Anticipate transportation failures or detours. Choose both a nearby meeting place and an out-of-state relative to be a check-in contact for everyone.     -- Educate your children. Obtain a copy of your school district's disaster policy regarding transportation and the release of students. Keep photos of family members in your wallet, in case they turn up missing.     -- Take a first aid course. Learn cardiopulmonary resuscitation.     -- Know where the nearest police and fire stations are. Know the route to the nearest hospital emergency room. Keep critical phone numbers by your phone and in your wallet.     -- Meet your neighbors and find out their medical or other expertise. Plan to unite if your neighborhood becomes isolated. ------------ WHEN IT HITS ------------ Indoors      -- Duck under a sturdy table or desk. Cover your head and face to prevent injury from glass and debris. Grab a leg of the furniture piece and be prepared to move with it if the shaking is severe.     -- If there is no suitable table or desk, move away from windows to a major wall or doorway and cover your head and face.     -- Avoid objects that could fall.     -- Don't  go outside, or use stairs or elevators, until the shaking stops.     -- In a crowded public place such as a store or stadium, do not rush to the exit. Move away from objects that could fall, such as shelves, but stay inside until the shaking stops. Outdoors      -- Move to an open area.     -- In the back country, move away from cliffs and steep embankments where there might be falling debris or a landslide. After the quake, get away from river beds. A major quake could send large amounts of water and mud downstream.     -- If you are near a body of water, move to high ground to escape a potential tsunami - a wave caused by water displaced in seismic activity. If the epicenter is near, you could have only a few minutes before such a wave would hit. In transit      -- If you are driving, stop your vehicle away from buildings, bridges and utility lines and stay inside until the shaking stops. Turn on car radio to find out what routes are open before proceeding and beware of hazards such as potentially weakened bridges.     -- If you are on foot near tall buildings, duck into a doorway to avoid falling glass and debris. Is everyone OK?      -- Provide first aid and a safe place for anyone who is injured.     -- Call 911 or other emergency phone numbers only if injuries are serious or the situation is life-threatening. Phone lines will be jammed, and lesser calls can hamper rescue efforts. Assess your situation      -- Check for hazards such as fire, leaks, chemical spills and precarious structures.     -- If you smell gas, turn off the master valve and get out. Don't do anything that would ignite it. This includes throwing switches, using the phone and using open flames.     -- Stockpile water. Fill your bathtub. Your community's supply might be limited due to broken mains. Be prepared to treat, filter or boil contaminated water.     -- If the electricity is out, put thermometers in the refrigerator and freezer and open the doors only when necessary. The freezer contents should stay frozen for up to 72 hours if the door remains closed. The refrigerator food should be OK for up to eight hours without electricity. Use your nose to determine if food is spoiled. When in doubt, throw it out.     -- If you have an electrical generator, do not hook it up to your home's wiring. Sending that current out to the poles can create a severe danger of electrocution for power-service workers. Aftershocks      -- Aftershocks are probable, but their timing, frequency and severity depend on the epicenter and nature of the original quake. Scientists will announce through media their best guesses on aftershocks. -------------- VITAL SUPPLIES --------------      -- Keep drinking water stored in a dry, cool place where it is least likely to be buried by debris. Four gallons per person could last a week. Keeping drums of water outside the home will protect them from structural collapse. Stock an unexpired supply of water-purification tablets or a back-country filtering device in case of contamination.     -- Have a wellstocked first aid  kit and a handbook.     -- Compile a portable supply of toiletries and medications you routinely need. Keep a stash of cash hidden somewhere. Banks and teller machines might be shut down.     -- Store valuable documents in a fire-resistant strong box.     -- Carry a multipurpose pocket knife. Have a crowbar on hand to open jammed doors. Stock goggles and dust masks, rope and plastic sheeting and duct tape for covering broken windows and temporary repairs.     -- Keep nonperishable food stored in a safe, dry place. Stock items that don't have to be cooked. Remember a can opener.     -- Camping gear should be organized and accessible should emergency shelter be necessary. Make sure that your camp stove is working and you have fuel.     -- Have a portable radio and fresh batteries. If you are hearing-impaired, buy a small battery-powered television.     -- Keep flashlights, batteries, candles and waterproof matches handy.     -- If you are elderly or infirm, carry a whistle around your neck. Arrange for a neighbor to look in on you.      -- Family members should know how to shut off water if a quake causes a leak in the house. The water shut-off valve is the first valve in the line after it enters the house.      -- Make sure all family members know how and when to turn off the gas. If you smell gas after an earthquake, shut off the main gas valve. Use a wrench to turn the valve either way until it is perpendicular to the pipe. Keep a wrench attached to the gas meter with a wire.      -- Chimneys inadequately tied to the structure can crumble or fall. Consult an engineer to inspect the chimney and devise a proper bracing system.      -- Glue a restraining lip around desk tops and along the front of shelves to prevent falling objects. Use plastic, not porcelain hanging planters.      -- Place emergency  power failure lights (constantly charging flashlights) in hallways, bathrooms and bedrooms. Remove from sockets for portability.      -- Use a hose to obtain drinking water from your water heater's drain valve in an emergency.      -- Use metal plumbers tape to strap water heater to studs in the wall.      -- A major cause of quake-related injuries is falling debris. Stay inside until your pathway is safe from falling objects.      -- To shut off the electricity, turn off single breakers first, then switch off main breaker.     Pull the main fuse blocks out on older panels.      -- Purchase a portable, gas-powered generator for emergency electricity. Only appliances that can use extension cords should be attached to a generator. A 2200-watt unit can power a refrigerator and several lamps. Keep fuel in a safe, protected container. Additional fuel can be siphoned from cars.      -- Keep a large multi-purpose dry chemical fire extinguisher (ABC rating) near kitchen and garage appliances. All family members should be instructed how to use it. Keep instructions on the canister.      -- Protect porcelain dinnerware by installing child-proof latches on cabinet doors.     After an earthquake, eat refrigerated food first, frozen food next and dried or canned food last. Remember to keep spare food on hand for pets.      -- Secure appliances and tall furniture to walls. Appliances could move and rupture gas or electrical lines. Furniture could topple, causing damage and injuries.      -- Consult a structural engineer to make sure your home is bolted to the foundation and that the structure is properly reinforced. Check roof, foundation and walls for cracks and overall condition.      -- Place bed away from windows and threat of broken glass.      -- Close blinds at night to prevent possible broken glass from flying into the room.      -- Securely fasten mirrors onto dressers. Do not lean them against the wall. Wall mirrors should be hung on double hooks. Use heavy double-sided tape on the back to help keep them on the wall      -- Keep a flashlight, spare batteries and sturdy shoes under the bed. Shoes will protect you from broken glass on the floor.      -- Store large drums of water outside. Replace water every six months.      -- Place heavy objects and electronic equipment on lower shelves to minimize damage. Place a beanbag of sand or shot in the bottom of vases and other porcelain containers to help hold them down. Velcro patches can be used to anchor objects on to shelves.      -- If water supply is cut off by an earthquake, drinking water is still available in your home in water heaters, toilet tanks, in-house plumbing and melted ice cubes. ----------------------------------- FREE EARTHQUAKE PREPAREDNESS POSTER -----------------------------------      Poster reprints of this page will be available free of charge at Seattle Times offices while supplies last.  Copies will be available from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. at 1120 John St., Seattle; 10777 Main St., Suite 100, Bellevue; 31620 23rd Ave. S, Suite 312, Federal Way; and 1211 164th St. SW, Suite 101, Lynnwood. For bulk orders, call 464-2461Caption:  ILLUSTRATIONDAVID MILLER, BO HOK CLINE, CHUCK TAYLOR /SEATTLE TIMES: HOW TO BE PREPARED
