In the Jan. 17, 1994 quake, which killed 61 people and caused $20 billion in damage, there was no greater site of death and destruction than the Northridge Meadows Apartments. ------------------------------------------------------------------     LOS ANGELES - In Pat Mekinski's recurring dream, she is in a building, any building, when the shaking starts. And then she is buried alive.    One year and more than 250 miles from the epicenter of Southern California's worst earthquake, and still she has this dream.     Awake, she will not ride an elevator.     She will not drive on an interstate freeway.     And she will never return here, where she and her husband, Tony, managed the Northridge Meadows Apartments.    In the Northridge quake, which killed 61 people, buckled freeways and caused $20 billion in damage, there was no greater site of death and destruction than that 164-unit complex.    Sixteen tenants, including a 14-year-old boy, died when the second floor became the first and the sign out front promising "luxury resort living" became a cruel joke.    In the year since last Jan. 17, the Mekinskis have seen nearly every point on the spectrum of human behavior: looting, greed, fear, sacrifice and good.     It is an experience they will never get over.    Nine months ago, they fled to booming Las Vegas, with hundreds of other fed-up Californians. Tony would have stayed. Pat refused.    In Vegas, bad luck followed like a shadow. Within weeks of arriving, Pat, 47, fell in a casino restaurant and broke her wrist. She hasn't been able to work since. Their car was stolen. Their new apartment complex caught fire. Tony was in an auto accident.    Still, it is better than California. To Pat, anyway. Tony, 51, is the opposite of his wife - stoic, not a talker about things he can't change. "We survived," he said recently, seated in a Vegas casino. "We have the dog."     The Mekinskis left their native Baltimore and headed to California in 1974. They became the managers at Northridge Meadows 10 years later. They were conscientious caretakers, the kind who would change an elderly resident's light bulb, the kind who took sick tenants to the hospital.    "That's the kind of family we were," Tony said.    Even now, they can rattle off apartment numbers and the residents who matched. Especially the ones who died when the earth heaved at 4:31 a.m.    No. 105, Cecilia and David Pressman, both 72. No. 123, Darla Enos, 42, whose husband survived. "He was drinking a cup of coffee. She was in the bedroom," Tony said.    No. 102, the Englars, Sharon and Phil, who did everything together and died the same way. They were just a few years from early retirement.  Killed in their bed, they died holding hands.    No. 101, the Lees, a family of four, whose mother and one son survived. The husband, Pil, and son Hawan, 14, did not.    The Mekinskis keep in touch with some of the survivors. Some they do not. Several lawsuits are pending against the building's owners.    "We've had attorneys calling us nonstop," Pat said. "Sometimes I just want to say, `I didn't build the building. Leave me alone.' "     Still, they cooperate as best they can. That is just their way.    Tony now works as the maintenance supervisor of a large apartment complex. It's not the same as managing your own, but he has adjusted.    It's been harder for Pat, who spent weeks in a cast up to her shoulder, unable to even dress herself.    Every Southern California aftershock leaves her sleepless. Always, just in the back of her mind, is the memory of what it was like to wake in blackness with the house pitching.    "I screamed, `Earthquake!' " she recalled. Then, the Mekinskis shot straight up in the air.    That's when Pat got hysterical. Tony, true to his nature, bounced quietly in bed. "When I looked up and saw our wall tear like newspaper, I thought, `Well, maybe I better get up,' " he said.    Nothing was where it was supposed to be. "I could smell gas," Pat said. "Babies were crying. Everybody was screaming."     She escaped their third-floor apartment via the sliding glass terrace door. She climbed down a boat ladder hoisted by a tenant.     This is what the Mekinskis carried: their beloved Pekingese, Nicky; a few papers; her mother's wedding ring, and the clothes on their backs.    Dawn rose like thunder. The first floor was gone, crushed into the subterranean parking garage.    For weeks, the Mekinskis slept at a Red Cross shelter.     They spent their days at the complex helping firefighters identify the apartments of the dead, getting information to relatives, assisting federal and state aid workers.    They had nothing. "I remember looking at my toothbrush" - one given to him by a shelter worker - "and thinking `This is all mine. I don't have to share it with anyone.' That's how crazy you get when you lose everything," Tony said.    The Mekinskis watched the National Guard stand in front of their condemned building and keep tenants out.     "We were watching looters go out the back with our TVs," Pat said.    When they moved east in March, they had salvaged a few more items from the shattered apartment - mostly clothes.     They arrived in Vegas with no jobs, no place to live and no furniture.    They've replaced a few things, but they don't think much any more of personal possessions.    And as bad as things have been, they still live by their own creed.    "As long as we're happening, the rest of it will happen," Tony said. "The secret to us is staying together. As long as we're together, that's all that matters." --------------------------- STATISTICS OF AN EARTHQUAKE ---------------------------     Damage statistics for the Jan. 17, 1994, magnitude-6.7       earthquake in Southern California:     Deaths: 61.    Injuries: at least 9,000.    Property damage: more than $20 billion.    Federal Emergency Management Agency assistance: $2.5       billion.    Small Business Administration loans: $3.7 billion.    Highway damage: seven freeway bridges toppled; $308       million loss.    Aftershocks: more than 6,000, with strongest a magnitude 5.9.Caption:  PHOTO1) JASON GROW / SAN JOSE MERCURY NEWS: A CALIFORNIA HIGHWAY PATROL OFFICER WALKS ALONG A COLLAPSED PORTION OF HIGHWAY 118 A YEAR AGO IN GRANADA HILLS, CALIF. THE MAGNITUDE-6.7 EARTHQUAKE HEAVILY DAMAGED THE LOS ANGELES-AREA FREEWAY SYSTEM.2) LEONARD ORTIZ / ORANGE COUNTY REGISTER: NANNETTE STONE, OF SYLMAR, CALIF., HUGS LOS ANGELES FIREFIGHTER CAPT. BOB WARD. FIREFIGHTERS RESCUED HER LAST JANUARY FROM A QUAKE-CAUSED FIRE.3) ERIC DRAPER / AP: MOLLY HANLON, CENTER, LOOKS FOR DIRECTION FROM TEACHERS AS HER FIRST-GRADE CLASS IN THE HOLLYWOOD AREA OF LOS ANGELES PRACTICES TAKING COVER AFTER A SERIES OF SEVERE AFTERSHOCKS THAT HIT THE AREA A YEAR AG
