A fund-raising effort begun the day after an earthquake shook Kobe, Japan, paid dividends last night for the continuing recovery effort.    At a Seattle dinner hosting the Japanese ambassador to the United Nations, the Japan-America Society announced that it was wiring $100,000 to agencies in and around Kobe.     "It wasn't a few corporations that got together," said James Doane, president of the statewide organization. "It was a grass-roots effort of hundreds and hundreds of individuals giving a small amount."      A Seattle-based member of the Kobe regional government said those small donations will go a long way toward helping the thousands in the city who are still homeless or living in temporary shelters.     "It's cold in Kobe," said Takeo Terahata, executive director of the Hyogo Cultural Center in Seattle.     "It's those warm hearts that will help them. It will give them courage and hope."      The money will go directly to a pool of relief providers in Japan, including the city of Kobe, the Hyogo Prefecture and the Japanese Red Cross.     The announcement was made before an audience of several hundred gathered at the Four Seasons Olympic Hotel to hear a speech by Ambassador Hisashi Owada.     Owada quickly expanded the theme of cooperation between the United States and Japan to the vision he has for relations between the two nations in the 21st century.     With the end of the Cold War and a greater mixing of the world economy, Owada said it is critical for the two nations to forge political stability throughout the Pacific Rim.     For the political and economic partnership to grow, Owada said, Americans must understand that Japan, too, contributes to the U.S. economy.     He listed statistics showing that Japanese citizens buy more U.S. products per capita each year than U.S. citizens buy from Japan.     "Many more Americans appear to have come under the unfortunate impression that the Japanese market is closed and trade policies are unfair," Owada said.    "The people of our two societies do not yet understand each other as well as I think they should
