MEXICO CITY - Seconds after the tectonic plates jerked more than seven miles beneath the mountainous state of Guerrero yesterday morning, dozens of alarms went off hundreds of miles to the north in the Mexican capital    Some 50 seconds before shock waves slammed into Mexico City, alarms triggered by 12 solar-powered seismic detectors along Mexico's Pacific coast  interrupted broadcasts of more than 40 radio stations,  warning many of the 20 million residents about the powerful quake on its way.    The sophisticated alarm system did little to curb panic in a city that was devastated by an 8.1 quake 10 years ago. But it was an indication of the level of earthquake preparedness  in a city whose entire face has changed since the "Big One" hit.    Though Mexico City was little more than shaken in this quake, five people died and hundreds of adobe buildings toppled in the Guerrero state in southern Mexico.    Two boys, a man and a woman were crushed by collapsing walls in separate towns  near the epicenter of the 7.3 magnitude quake, authorities said. An elderly man died after suffering a heart attack in the neighboring state of Oaxaca.    Officials said they could not confirm a separate report of three other deaths in another Guerrero community, because there were no communications with the remote mountain village.    The quake, centered near the Oaxaca-Guerrero state border 190 miles southeast of Mexico City, lasted nearly a minute in the capital.    Mexico City observers  said they sensed a world of difference in the city's response 10 years after the Sept. 19, 1985, earthquake that killed at least 10,000 people and razed many parts of the city.    "In 1985, nobody understood the meaning of the magnitude of an earthquake," said environmentalist Homero Aridjis, an outspoken critic of the government. "This time . . . people were prepared."     There are still reminders here of the official failures that followed the '85 quake. Damaged and abandoned structures remain on the city's landscape. But most Mexico City intellectuals now view the devastation of 1985 as a powerful wake-up call that shook this capital into activism and its government into creating early-warning systems that are now permanent features of Mexican life.    The awareness - and fear - that drove millions of Mexicans to prearranged refuges within seconds of yesterday's early-warning signal was only one of many changes. The '85 quake affected tens of thousands of lives, but it also gave rise to hundreds of independent civic-action groups and labor unions, after it became clear that many of the dead had been virtual prisoners in illegal structures, dilapidated housing and sweatshop factories throughout the city.     Those activist groups became powerful voices that helped create a new set of laws regulating construction, requiring earthquake drills and improving workplace safety.    Neighborhood committees rose up amid the government's post-quake neglect, and some are still influential lobbying groups. Over the years they have taught earthquake safety door to door in the city's poorest neighborhoods. And their public clamor, analysts said, was largely responsible for yesterday's   fast response.    At the 15th of September Building in the capital's Tlatelolco district - one of the worst-hit areas in 1985 - a terrified but well-informed Hilda Gutierrez said she knew exactly what to do when she heard the radio announcer shout, "An earthquake is coming! It's an earthquake!"     Quickly, the 62-year-old woman shut off the gas heater and the stove, grabbed her 4-year-old grandson and ran to the doorway, "which they told us was the safest place in an earthquake."     Asked who had told her that, Gutierrez said it was a doctor in the building - a physician who became a fierce activist after the '85 quake.    Dr. Cuauhtemoc Abarca Chavez had been jogging when the '85 quake hit and single-handedly rescued several people from the rubble. With federal funding, he later formed a group that educated the entire sprawling neighborhood on earthquake safety.    Only last Saturday, Gutierrez said, she received her first safety visit from a city official, who delivered the same information.    The worst part of yesterday's quake, she said, was emotional. "Unconsciously, you remember," she said, recalling the disaster that tore the top seven floors off her apartment building and dashed the building next door to the ground. "You go back to 1985. That was the worst."     Most Mexican quakes occur along a long swath of coastline from the Guatemalan border to a point near Puerto Vallarta.    While Mexico City is often hundreds of miles away from the epicenter, it is vulnerable because much of it sits atop the muddy sediments of drained lake beds. Material from Associated Press is included in this report.Caption:  PHOTOAP: NERVOUS MEXICO CITY OFFICE WORKERS WAIT OUTSIDE AFTER A MAGNITUDE 7.3 EARTHQUAKE SHOOK THE CITY YESTERDAY.
