One thing to be thankful about this Thanksgiving is that the dire warnings of geologists of a potentially huge earthquake off the Northwest coast have not yet come true.     The latest addition to mounting evidence that a "Big One" could occur here is a paper by geologists, published in today's edition of the journal Nature, that a magnitude 9 earthquake occurred nearly 300 years ago off the Northwest coast, stretching 600 miles from southern Vancouver Island to Humboldt, Calif.     The Nature paper does not discuss the consequences of such a huge earthquake if it occurred again. But in a survey of recent "Cascadia" earthquake research in the December issue of Scientific American, Roy Hyndman of the Geological Survey of Canada said such a quake could lower coastal communities three to six feet and shove them 15 to 30 feet seaward, with resulting catastrophic damage.     Shaking in Seattle and other inland cities would not be so severe, Hyndman said, but the earthquake would be so powerful that "the danger to those cities is still substantial."      Only two quakes of that size have occurred in recent history, in 1960 in Chile, and 1964 in Alaska. Both caused severe damage.     Records indicate such earthquakes occur here at an interval of every 300 to 900 years.     It was U.S. Geological Survey scientist Brian Atwater who first found coastal evidence of past earthquakes, including trees killed when their roots subsided into salt water or sand deposits left by tsunami waves. Such evidence has been accumulating the past decade.     Subsequently, Kenji Satake of the Geological Survey of Japan looked for historic evidence of Japanese tsunami waves that might have originated from a Pacific Northwest quake. He concluded that a wave that hit the Japanese island of Honshu came from an earthquake along North America that occurred about 9 p.m. on Jan. 26, 1700. Indian oral history appears to lend weight to that calculation.     If so, how big was it? Critical in calculating past earthquake energy is determining how large an area of the colliding North America and Juan de Fuca plates - which form the crust and sea floor - might slip.     A team of geologists found logs and plants killed or buried by past quakes from California to Vancouver Island, and had their dating analyzed by labs at the University of Washington and in New Zealand. The purpose was to see if the sites had been disturbed at the same time.     The match was not perfect. The scientists can't say with certainty all the sites shook at once, but they do appear within a few decades of each other, most likely between 1700 and 1720. That means while a single giant 300-year-old earthquake has not been proved, it has not been disproved either, in favor of a series of smaller earthquakes.     "The hypothesis stands a little stronger," Atwater said. "It makes a magnitude 9 seem less like a dirty word in Cascadia."      If the Big One indeed occurred, it means an underground area of 50,000 square kilometers slipped at once, jolting the Pacific Northwest.     A series of recent measurements confirms that the coast of this region continues to compress as tension between the colliding plates increases, Hyndman said. The coast is rising by a rate of one to four millimeters a year (a millimeter is about one-25th of an inch) and is contracting horizontally by several centimeters (two to three inches) each year.
