The front yard of Jun Matsumoto's Bellevue home looked like the day before the year's biggest sale in a bargain basement. Piles of clothes were scattered across the neatly trimmed yard, lawn chairs were in the driveway amid stacked boxes.     In the middle of the chaos a dozen women picked through boxes, lifting up items, examining them and then sorting them  into piles. There was a pile for children's games, another for Japanese artwork and still another for kitchen gadgets. A brand-new vacuum cleaner was pushed to one side.     If it could be donated, it was in Matsumoto's front yard yesterday. And if it can  be sold, it will be on sale today at the Bellevue Conference Center, 505 106th Ave. N.E., starting at 10 a.m.     The money raised from the giant rummage sale will be donated to the American Red Cross and sent to Japan to help victims of the Kobe earthquake, which has killed more than 5,000 people and left hundreds of thousands homeless. The women hope to raise $10,000.     "There has been a tremendous outpouring," said Naoko Tajima, helping sort through the boxes of goods donated for the sale. "Some of us have relatives in Kobe. Kobe is a huge city, and we know people there."      But even if these women didn't know people in Kobe, they'd  be doing relief work. When the Northridge earthquake struck in Los Angeles, they raised $4,000 to send there. Stories about the refugees in Rwanda touched their hearts; they raised another $4,000 for that war-torn country.     Some of them belong to the Japanese Women's Society. Most are married to Japanese businessmen working in this country, and because their visas do not allow them to work, they've turned their energy to volunteering.     At another house on Yarrow Point, Masako Ushiba and Keiko Shimizu were also sorting donated goods. The hardest part, they said, was figuring out what to charge.     Some beautiful wooden platters were priced at $1, Japanese artwork for a few dollars and $50 video software, still in original boxes, was marked for $10.     Pam Davis of the Seattle/King County chapter of the Red Cross said proceeds from the sale will help supply water, food and blankets to Kobe residents.     Davis said the outpouring of earthquake-relief donations has been heavy from the Northwest because of the close ties between West Coast and Japanese cities, and because of the large Japanese communities in the area. ----------- HOW TO HELP ----------- The rummage sale to raise money for Kobe earthquake victims will run from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. today at the Bellevue Conference Center, 505 106th Ave. N.E. Donors may drop off items from 8 to 10 a.m. Cash or checks also will be acceptedCaption:  PHOTOTERESA TAMURA / SEATTLE TIMES: VOLUNTEERS SORT DONATED ITEMS AT JUN MATSUMOTO'S BELLEVUE HOME YESTERDAY, PREPARING FOR TODAY'S RUMMAGE SALE AT THE BELLEVUE CONFERENCE CENTER TO AID KOBE QUAKE VICTIMS
