When the first temblor rattled her third-floor apartment in a development on the outskirts of Kobe, Karin Zaugg leapt into the doorway for protection.     And when the first shock was over, she grabbed the flashlight from her earthquake kit and headed for the upper floors of her eight-story building to guide some of the 15 foreigners who didn't speak Japanese out of the darkened structure.     Zaugg, 24, who grew up on Seattle's Capitol Hill, took her earthquake kit with her when she went to work as a translator and sister-cities coordinator for the Kobe mayor's office a year and a half ago. After all, when she was a student at Claremont College in 1990, she'd been through the Los Angeles quake that registered 5.5 on the Richter scale.    "Everything was shaking, and I could hear things crashing," Zaugg said of the  quake that occurred at 5:46 a.m. Kobe time.     "I lost half of my dishes," said Zaugg. "Luckily my big bookcase was on wheels so it just rolled over and hit the other wall and didn't fall."      Some of her friends were hit by their bookcases while sleeping, or found their glasses crushed by overturned furniture, she said, explaining that during the winter to reduce heating costs, people often sleep in their living rooms.     Zaugg lives in a 24-building complex with 64 units in each building, about 20 miles outside downtown Kobe. All transportation between her area and the city center - which passes through tunnels in the Rokko Mountains - has been cut off.     "We are basically isolated on this side of the mountain because the train lines that run into Kobe are down. We'll eat boxed food and stay here," she said.     The situation is much worse nearer the center of the city, where 80 percent of the area's population lives, Zaugg said. "The most perturbing things are a lot of smashed and tilting buildings," and the fires visible on television.     Electricity was restored where she lives within four hours, but the gas remained off.    "If it had been at prime commuting time, it would have been a lot worse," said Zaugg.     Seattle is Kobe's most active sister city, which is why the Kobe government likes to have a Seattleite working in the sister-city office, said Zaugg. Kobe was also Seattle's first sister city; the relationship goes back to 1957, when the Seattle-Kobe Sister City Association was established to increase international understanding and friendship.     In addition, Hyogo Prefecture, which includes Kobe, also is the sister state of Washington.     Sister-city exchanges include everything from youth soccer teams and dozens of school and cultural visits to various gifts.     For example, there are Japanese cherry trees, a gift from Kobe, planted at Seattle's Kobe Terrace Park above the International District, in Seward Park, at Seattle Center and along the Burke-Gilman Trail.     During the 1960s, Japanese carp were donated for placement in pools at the Japanese Tea Garden at the University of Washington Arboretum, and a coastal Northwest-style totem pole was carved at Kobe City Hall Park.     Just last week, Port of Seattle officials were in Kobe for the inauguration of nonstop air service between Seattle-Tacoma International Airport and the new Kansai International Airport, which serves the Japanese cities of Kobe, Osaka and Kyoto.se Japan has already begun to re-rout shipments via Osaka and other ports less affected by the quake.     As many as 30 companies that contribute as much as $100 million annually to Washington state's economy, have headquarters or offices in the Kobe area, say Port officials here.     Nintendo, with headquarters at Kyoto, said damage to its factory and offices was minor, consisting mostly of items falling off desks.     Perrin Kaplan, Nintendo of North America spokeswoman in Redmond, said officials here talked by phone with headquarters. About one-third of the workers at Kyoto were able to get to work, others were stymied by closed rails and highways. About 700 people work at the headquarters.     Edmonds Community College maintains a branch campus about 30 miles from Kobe's city center. The approximately 20 faculty members and five area students were all safe,  said Carol Berg-Christiansen, a college spokeswoman, who talked with branch president Garry Lingerfelt in Kobe shortly after the quake.     Lingerfelt reported minor damage to the college's seven-story building and expected the school to be closed for a day.     Edmonds CC officials also will help Japanese exchange students get in touch with family and friends in Japan.  Berg-Christiansen said meetings began today to  help 100 Japanese students from the Kobe area who are studying at the school in Lynnwood.     Some students have not been able to reach family and friends in Kobe.     Fritz Hundertmark, 61, of Mill Creek, is among Puget Sound-area residents studying at the Kobe campus. Hundertmark called his wife Louise last night and told her he could not get out of bed when he first felt the quake's rumble.     Hundertmark told his wife the shaking pinned him to the bed in his student apartment for about a minute. When he was freed, Hundertmark grabbed his pants and jacket and fled the building.    "A lot of the people in Japan are real good friends of mine and I really believe in what we are doing on that campus," Berg-Christiansen said. "It was such a huge sense of relief that the people were OK."      Kyoji Ueda, director of the Kobe trade-information office in Seattle, was able to reach relatives near Kobe who reported that most phone service, except some pay phones, was out.     "There is a long line at the public phone for people who want to make contact with their families," Ueda said.     Last night, Gov. Mike Lowry and Mayor Norm Rice expressed sorrow and concern for Kobe's citizens. Both promised to provide help and alerted their respective emergency-management agencies.     Officials today were expected to determine what kinds of aid Kobe might need and then take action to provide it.     "We will do all we can to rally our community to offer aid and further strengthen our sister-city relationship," said Rice.     Lowry said he had sent a cable to his counterpart, Gov. Toshitami Kaihara, to let him know Washington state stands ready to help. Seattle Times staff reporters Tanya Flanagan and Marla Williams contributed to this report
