SALEM - The Capitol rotunda has been sealed off for nearly two years now. Since September, it has been taken over by towers of scaffolding and dust-covered workers wearing hard hats.    At times, the low rumble of giant machinery and pounding of jackhammers can be heard during legislative committee meetings around the building.    It is all part of a $4.3 million project to shore up the rotunda after the 1993 Scotts Mill earthquake cracked the dome and jiggled loose the gold statue of the anonymous pioneer that rests atop the building.    Some experts say the state would need to spend 10 times that amount to really reinforce the building against future seismic events, and that the current project amounts to a Band-Aid.    One state analyst says the best approach might be to tear down the 56-year-old Capitol and construct a new building at an estimated cost of $130 million. Others say the state should consider completely upgrading the building for $63 million.    So legislators face a choice between paying for immediate needs such as education and public safety or shelling out millions of dollars to guard against a big earthquake, an event that could happen next week or in a hundred years.    One key lawmaker says the $4.3 million project provides for the most important work at the best price.    Sen. Eugene Timms, R-Burns, said any further work would take a huge cut of an already tight budget.    "You're going to spend the money where its needed the most, and I just don't feel that $60 million spent on the Capitol is needed," said Timms, who is co-chairman of the Joint Ways and Means Committee, the Legislature's budget-writing panel.    The work under way in the rotunda will add new strength to the 106-foot dome after the 5.6 Scotts Mill quake caused the 8 1/2-ton statue atop the Capitol to shift on its base. Completion is scheduled this summer.    Clay tiles and brick areas between the inner and outer walls shook loose during the quake and were crumbling in some areas.    Crews are installing 13,000 steel-reinforcement bars and adding 500 yards of gunite, a type of concrete.    Paul Denman, project manager for the rotunda construction, said the project will strengthen the most dangerous area of the Capitol.    "It was pretty obvious the rotunda created the greatest risk for loss of life," Denman said.    However, Denman said that to really protect the Capitol, an upgrade of the entire building would be necessary.    That would include installing new footings and base isolators, or shock absorbers, and reinforcing the House and Senate chambers. One expert is warning that a large earthquake that could level the building will likely happen in the near future.    "In the next 50 years we have a very high likelihood of having a magnitude of a 6.5 to 6.6 quake," said Mei Mei Wang, earthquake engineering specialist for the state Department of Geology and Mineral Industries. "The Capitol could definitely crumble
