SALEM - The Oregon State Capitol is looking different these days, and it's not just the absence of lobbyists stalking the halls and lawmakers debating the issues.    Gone too are the towers of scaffolding covered with workers shoring up the rotunda against a future earthquake.    Workers have been laboring since last summer to peel the skin from the interior of the rotunda, reinforce it with steel and concrete and put it all back together again.    A year and 13,000 steel reinforcement bars later, the $4.3 million project is nearly completed. Polishing the marble, removing two barriers and replacing several murals are all that is left.    Two years ago, the 5.6-magnitude Scotts Mill earthquake caused the 8 1/2-ton golden pioneer statue atop the Capitol to shift on its base, and cracked the dome. Clay tiles and mortared brick areas between the inner and outer walls shook loose during the quake and were crumbling in some areas.    The walls of the rotunda were strengthened to a thickness of about 18 inches at the base and 12 inches at the ceiling level. The pedestal of the pioneer statue was anchored to the 106-foot dome.    "I think that for $4.3 million what you paid for is a stronger rotunda, and you got that," says Mei Mei Wang, earthquake engineering specialist for the state Department of Geology and Mineral Industries. "It did not, by any means, increase the strength throughout the Capitol building."     Wang thinks a more intense or closer quake could have destroyed the rotunda.    "Without strengthening and another earthquake," she says, "the rotunda could have been reduced to a pile of rubble."     But Wang cautions that the project has changed the characteristic of the building, making damage to the rest of the Capitol more likely in the case of another earthquake.    "The rotunda itself would fare much better," she says. "But now the rotunda, which is stiffer, is going to pound against the rest of the building much harder and perhaps cause more damage."     Some experts say the state would need to spend 10 times as much to reinforce the entire 57-year-old building. Options for upgrading the Capitol range from constructing a new building to the tune of $130 million to renovating the current building for $63 million.    To protect the Capitol, Wang says, the state would need to install base isolators, or giant rubber blocks that act as shock absorbers, reinforce the House and Senate chambers and find a way to keep the marble slabs from sliding off the building.    "The gold man and the rotunda are Oregon's signature," he says. "And we wanted it done right and as close to original as we could
