Geology. Attention, waterfront homeowners: Standing groves of underwater trees in Lake Washington - part of long-ago forests on Mercer Island and present-day Kirkland - suggest the enormity of prehistoric, earthquake-triggered landslides in the area. New research mapping the lake's bottom is showing that massive slides were once common. Could they still occur ---------------------------------      The Seattle Tennis Club is a recreational enclave for the city's well-to-do, a white and green jewel on the sparkling blue shore of Lake Washington.     Its choice waterfront property near Madison Park also marks the head of a massive, prehistoric landslide into the lake, most likely triggered by the kind of big earthquake that scientists estimate hits this area every 300 to 400 years.     As scientists from the University of Washington and elsewhere map the lake's bottom this summer, it's becoming evident that such landslides were once common.     Sonar is revealing abundant evidence of past geologic catastrophes that are obscured by erosion and vegetation on land. The resulting scroll-like maps make the underwater shoreline of Lake Washington look snaggletoothed with past landslides.     The tongues of soil jutting hundreds of yards into the lake make it easy to envision a modern-day disaster in which some of the most expensive property this side of Malibu slumps into the deep - million-dollar homes leaving a trail of bubbles as they sink.     "These past slides are truly awesome, taking several cubic blocks of material with them," said Robert Karlin, a University of Nevada geologist who started work on Lake Washington to track past climate change and got sidetracked onto examining past earthquakes.     After all, chunks of forest from two places on Mercer Island and a third in Kirkland slid into the lake about 1,100 years ago, creating standing groves of underwater trees preserved by the cold water.     More recently, portions of the Alaska cities of Valdez and Seward were swallowed by the sea during the 1964 earthquake there.     The resulting waves from such an event today might be big enough to either snap the cables holding Lake Washington's two floating bridges in place or send water crashing over the roadway, scientists speculated.     So is it time to move? Karlin, fielding that question on the UW research boat Clifford A. Barnes as it cruised past the tennis club, cautioned that before panicking, residents should remember that life carries many risks. A catastrophic earthquake that occurs once every several centuries is just one of them.     And earthquakes are just one hazard of the region's sometimes unstable hillside geology. Hundreds of small landslides occurred around the Seattle area during the wet winter of 1971-72, caused by heavy rain.     Still, geologists the past decade have switched from considering Western Washington a relatively low area of severe earthquake risk to one badly shaken every 300 to 400 years. As they probe the land and water, physical evidence of past disruptions and significant faults is rapidly accumulating.     For example, the recently discovered Seattle Fault that runs from the Kitsap Peninsula to Lake Sammamish appears to be more complicated than initially thought. A single deep fault appears to split into a "flower structure" as it nears the surface, which results in numerous faults cutting east to west.     While dates are still being refined, research indicates that big earthquakes - far larger than anything experienced since pioneer settlement - occurred about 300, 1,100, 1,400, 1,900, 2,400 and 2,800 years ago. There have been 33 major disturbances in the past 12,000 years.     Slow creeping of land also goes on. "That's a major concern of Burlington Northern," said UW oceanographer Mark Holmes, explaining that railroad tracks along Puget Sound can go slowly out of alignment as old landslide sites inch seaward.     Scientists are using the survey data gathered this summer to feed computer models that will try to correlate earthquake force to likely damage, giving a clearer idea of the danger.     "A lot of slopes are actually more stable because of construction" that has effectively terraced them, noted Mike Grass, a University of Nevada geologic engineer.     Besides Lake Washington, the UW research vessel has also detected big landslides along the shores of Puget Sound at Possession Point on the south end of Whidbey Island, along the shore about a mile south of Mukilteo, at Three Tree Point between Seattle and Tacoma, and at Skiff Point at Bainbridge Island.     Previous research has found evidence of major uplifts of Alki Point and the south end of Bainbridge Island and a major sinkage of West Point in the big earthquake that occurred about 1,100 years ago.     While the Barnes probes the coastline, the U.S. Geological Survey has been aboard the Robert Gray sending sound waves to the bottom of Puget Sound to map faults. Geologists, measuring the amount of undisturbed sediment since the faults last shifted, hope to use the information to further estimate how long ago earthquakes were.     Both the Seattle Fault and the Whidbey Island Fault that cuts across the south end of that island are believed capable of triggering earthquakes of magnitude 7 or greater, approaching or exceeding the shaking of the 1906 San Francisco earthquake.     Both sonar efforts are the most detailed mapping of the underwater Sound and lake floor that have been done to date.     The Puget Sound basin is a trough of ridges and valleys left by the glaciers of the last Ice Age, which reached their maximum extent about 15,000 years ago. At that time the future site of Seattle was buried under ice 3,000 feet thick, and the end of the glacier extended south of Olympia.     The ice left a geologic layer cake in the Seattle area, Karlin explained. There is a base of sandstone formed between ice ages. It is topped by a thick layer of clay, then sand, and finally gravel till. Steep hillsides can expose the sand layer. Too much water or earthquake shaking can cause it to slide across the clay.     Past landslide sites along Lake Washington tend to be marked by a flat debris pan at the water's edge where homes are commonly built, a forested hillside too steep for building where the landslide came from, and then more homes on the relatively stable gravel till at the top of the hill.     This pattern can still be seen on Mercer Island at places where patches of trees slid upright into the lake. A chain was dragged across the drowned forests earlier in this century to knock off the tree tops and improve navigation.     This geologic rawness is unsurprising because Lake Washington itself is only about 13,000 years old, explained UW limnologist, or lake expert, Sally Abella.     The lake and the rest of the Puget Sound basin initially filled with sea water as the glacier retreated past the Strait of Juan de Fuca. "Lake Washington for a short time was an arm of the sea," Abella said.     Eventually the absence of the heavy ice allowed the land to rebound about 350 feet higher. The lake's saltwater drained away and was replaced by fresh water starting about 11,000 years ago.     Lake Washington's initial outlet may have been where the Montlake Cut is today, but eventually it carved a new outlet out its southern end. The Black River drainage encountered by pioneers wound through the future site of Tukwila to the Duwamish River.     The Black River disappeared when the Army Corps of Engineers built the Ballard Locks, Ship Canal and Montlake Cut to connect Lake Washington directly to Puget Sound, lowering the lake about 10 feet in the process. The Cedar River was redirected into the southern part of the lake. Extensive marshy wetlands along the Sammamish River disappeared as the lake dropped and the Sammamish fell more rapidly toward it.     Opening of the Montlake Cut exposed some of the old landslide aprons, and they have subsequently become prime waterfront property.     The same process of erosion has occurred along Puget Sound. Shorelines with trees with U-shaped trunks are examples of places where the trees have started to lean as the land gives way and then change direction, growing upward.     A dramatic recent example of this region's not-so-solid-earth was in 1986, when an underwater slide left a portion of the Renton sewage outfall in Puget Sound suspended 40 feet above the bottom. Engineers used fill dirt to close the gap.     While there are many places where the shoreline has slumped, there are others that exhibit long-term stability.     Microsoft Chairman Bill Gates, for example, can relax: Surveys show that his multimillion-dollar Lake Washington home now under construction is some distance from the nearest prehistoric slide site.Caption:  PHOTO: MAP1) CHUCK EICHTEN / SEATTLE TIMES: SUNKEN SECRETS (MAP NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY)2) JIMI LOTT/SEATTLE TIMES: RESEARCH PROFESSOR MARK HOLMES, LEFT, AND RESEARCH SCIENTIST SALLY ABELLA OF THE UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON VIEW A SONAR IMAGE OF THE BOTTOM OF LAKE WASHINGTON.3) JIMI LOTT/SEATTLE TIMES: DR. ROBERT KARLIN AND MARK HOLMES, RESEARCH PROFESSOR AT THE UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON, DROP A SIDE-SCAN SONAR DEVICE INTO LAKE WASHINGTON. THE UNIT IS USED TO MAP SUBMERGED LAND FOR EVIDENCE OF LANDSLIDES
