YEREVAN, Armenia - To Garina Khknavorian, the choice is clear: live with an aging, Soviet-built nuclear power plant in her back yard, or spend another four years doing her family's laundry by hand and by candlelight    She'll take the nuke any day, thank you.    "We understand that there is a risk, but to live endlessly under these conditions is impossible," said Khknavorian, 47. "We want to live like human beings."     With a mixture of glee and anxiety, the citizens of electricity-starved Armenia watched last week as their government officially reopened the controversial nuclear-power plant just 20 miles west of Yerevan, their earthquake-prone capital.    Armenia has spent about $42 million - much of it aid from Russia - retooling the reactor in Medzamor. Built in 1976, the plant has never had a reported accident, and it was not damaged by the devastating 1988 earthquake that killed 25,000 people. Nevertheless, authorities shut it down in 1989 after thousands of demonstrators took to the streets to demand its closure.    Then came a punishing energy blockade imposed by Armenia's neighbors because of the 7-year-old conflict with Azerbaijan over the enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh. Armenia's factories ground to a halt. Yerevan's subway service became erratic. And through three bitter winters, electricity has been restricted to as little as an hour or two a day.    Two years ago, despite opposition from its neighbors, Armenia decided to reopen the nuclear plant. Forests disappear     Desperate for warmth, Armenians felled an estimated 1 million trees for firewood, leaving the landscape bereft of shade during the baking Caucasian summers.    Families who could afford $20 monthly bribed hospitals, bakeries or factories getting priority supplies of electricity for the right to string illegal power lines into their homes.    Others bought jerry-built kerosene space heaters and slept in their clothes. Bread was rationed. Black-market gasoline prices soared. By some estimates, 700,000 of the 3.5 million Armenians fled the country.    Yerevan once had a higher standard of living than Moscow. But years of war and deprivation have changed that.     Inside the Khknavorians' dilapidated building, the hall lights, elevator and water pump require electricity. The drudgery of daily life begins with a hike through the dark on a crumbling concrete staircase.    Even when the electricity comes on, it is rarely strong enough to pump water higher than the fifth floor, where the Khknavorians live. Neighbors come down to fill buckets. Car batteries run television     The Khknavorians are well-off by Armenian standards and have been able to afford a kerosene heater, gas canisters for cooking and an oven for baking when the electricity is on.    Their son, David, an electronics whiz, has rigged an ingenious system of transformers and car batteries that allows them to watch up to 10 hours of television when the power is off.       In summer, the refrigerator rarely gets enough power to cool, so Garina Khknavorian must shop every day or two. The family has a washing machine, but to use it, she must save up a bathtub of water and have it heating on the kerosene stove by the time the electricity comes on. It's less trouble to wash by hand.    When the power comes on, she rushes to cook, vacuum, iron and wash, all in two hours.    "The other day - we hadn't had any electricity at all for two weeks - and my mom just started to cry," said daughter Anait.    "This has been going on for four years," her mother said. 12 hours of power by fall     Fuel was loaded into the Medzamor plant on June 19.  Officials promise that the 400-megawatt plant will be at full power by September, meeting 30 percent of the republic's energy needs and giving consumers 12 hours of power each day.    A second, older reactor at Medzamor is scheduled to open next year.      The West remains concerned that the plant lacks a containment dome to trap radiation in an accident. Nevertheless, the design is considered safer than Chernobyl, which spewed radiation over Europe in 1986.Caption:  PHOTOKNIGHT-RIDDER NEWSPAPERS: ARMENIA -- NUCLEAR POWER PLANT (MAP NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY)
