A moderate earthquake shook the Northwest last evening, startling residents but apparently causing no significant damage or injuries. The quake was felt from the Canadian border to Oregon, and as far east as Yakim      The tremor, which struck at 7:11 p.m., registered a magnitude of 5.0, said Willis Jacobs of the U.S. Geological Survey's National Earthquake Information Center in Golden, Colo. It was centered approximately 10 miles southwest of downtown Seattle, he said.     As earthquakes go, seismologists said, the earth's movement was fairly shallow, about  10.5 miles from the surface, which is why so many people felt it. The angular motion was also similar to the deadly earthquake in Northridge, Calif. a year ago.     Aftershocks are likely to occur for a few days and possibly up to a week, seismologists said.    Staffers at the Washington state Emergency Services unit, as well as local police, firefighters, and utility companies throughout the Puget Sound area, said there were no reports of significant damage or injuries.    Dave Tyson had just walked inside his home in SeaTac when "the house all of a sudden went into this rolling motion. We all had to grab something" just to remain standing. Tyson's house is at the south end of the flight path used by jets coming into Seattle-Tacoma International Airport, and he thought the rumbling, crashing sound meant "a 747 was about to come down in the backyard. We didn't know whether to hit the deck or run outside."      Much of the minor damage reported centered in the Auburn area.     Wine bottles burst, light bulbs exploded and several food items tumbled off the shelves at the Albertson's grocery store in north Auburn.     "Actually I think we were pretty lucky," said store manager Mervyn Benoit. "All in all, people were pretty calm. I think everybody was wise to what was happening."      Rather than run out, people walked out of the store, he said.     "I just looked up and said, `Oh, oh, what's going to fall on my head?' "      Benoit said that the shelves situated north-south direction weren't affected at all, while all the others, facing east-west were shaken badly.    The quake was felt more than 240 miles to the south in Salem, about 100 miles to the north in Blaine, on the Canadian border, and more than 140 miles to the southeast in Yakima.    Passengers on airplanes and trains in the area experienced delays as runways and tracks were inspected for damage.     As many as 600 passengers were stuck on four Amtrak trains in the Northwest for up to three hours while post-earthquake inspections were completed, according to Sue Martin, an Amtrak spokeswoman. Late last night three of the trains were sitting near Kelso; and the Empire Builder, which is headed for Chicago, was sitting on tracks near Skykomish. Some of the passengers were bused to destinations, Martin said.     The tracks were shut down by Burlington Northern Railroad, which operates the system. For the protection of the public, the company routinely shuts down tracks if a significant earthquake hits near the tracks, said Gus Melonas, a spokesman for Burlington Northern.     Four flights preparing to land at Sea-Tac International Airport were delayed for about 20 minutes, while the runways were checked for damage. None was reported.     "We certainly wouldn't expect a lot of damage but it is a reminder that we live in a seismic area," said Bill Steele, coordinator of the University of Washington's seismology lab.     He described it as "light, moderate earthquake," adding that "a magnitute of 5.0 could have been a lot worse."     Washington has had major quakes this century. In 1949, a quake centered near Olympia registered 7.1, about the size of the quake that hit San Francisco in October 1989.     Last night's temblor was the strongest felt in Seattle since the 6.5 earthquake hit on April 29, 1965.     Washington and Oregon average about 1,000 earthquakes a year, of which only a handful are strong enough to be felt.     Those big enough to cause heavy damage have averaged about 30 to 40 years apart, with the most recent one in 1965.     In the 1949 quake, eight people died and the temblor rained down bricks and debris onto city streets, damaging most of the buildings in the Capitol complex in Olympia, snapping gas mains and causing landslides. Damage was estimated at $15 million to $25 million.     The 1965 quake, measuring 6.5, struck the Seattle-Tacoma area in April. The quake caused small mudslides, twisted railroad tracks, toppled chimneys and crumbled the shore of Olympia's Capitol Lake.     The epicenter was located along Hood Canal near Dabob Bay. The quake killed eight people, injured at least 31 and caused an estimated $12.5 million in property damage.     Here is a list of other significant earthquakes in Washington state this century:      --   March 1967, a quake measuring 4.5, felt from Everett to Olympia, Bremerton to Issaquah.     --   November 1972, measuring 3.5, centered in Port Townsend. Felt as far north as Victoria, B.C.     --   March 1978, measuring 4.8, epicenter just north of Bremerton.     --   February 1981, the "Friday the 13th" earthquake - measuring 4.0, epicenter directly beneath Cle Elum. ------------------------------- EARTHQUAKE PREPAREDNESS POSTERS ------------------------------- Poster reprints of earthquake preparedness information are available free of charge at Seattle Times offices while supplies last. Copies are available from 8 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. at 1120 John St., Seattle; 10777 Main St., Suite 100, Bellevue; 31620 23rd Ave. S., Suite 312, Federal Way; and 1211 164th St. S.W., Suite 101, Lynnwood. For bulk orders, call 464-2461.Caption:  PHOTOALAN BERNER / SEATTLE TIMES: THIS WAS HOW LAST NIGHT'S EARTHQUAKE WAS RECORDED AT THE UNIVERSITY OF WASHINGTON SEISMOLOGY LABORATORY.
