Frightened Puget Sound homeowners who suddenly feel the need for earthquake insurance may be out of luck.     After last weekend's earthquake, two of the state's leading home insurers, State Farm and Allstate, declared a 30-day moratorium on selling new earthquake coverage. That could be extended if there are tremors in the coming days.     Also for the next month, Pemco, a Seattle-based insurer, will only sell policies with a sky-high 25 percent deductible. Farmers Insurance, the state's third-largest home underwriter, stopped issuing new earthquake policies last June.     Safeco, also based in Seattle, will continue to offer earthquake coverage under its customary terms. That's because Saturday's quake registered only 5.0 on the Richter scale. After quakes above 5.0, Safeco, too, calls a moritorium on new underwriting.     Putting the brakes on new business is standard practice in the insurance industry just after a disaster.     Since there is always the risk of aftershocks, selling earthquake coverage immediately after the event is "like selling fire insurance to someone whose house is still burning," says Steve Methner, State Farm's public-affairs officer in Olympia.      Even after the moratoriums expire, homeowners may find earthquake coverage tougher to get. Safeco, for instance, recently put in new rules for the homes it covers, requiring that hot water tanks be bolted or strapped down. Older houses also must be secured to a concrete foundation.     John Applegate, an agent with Sound Insurance in Seattle, said insurers are also looking more skeptically at homes on hillsides or near a shoreline.     Deductibles are steep and getting steeper. Pemco and Safeco are both raising their standard deductible from 5 percent to 10 percent of the total value of the property.     These deductibles apply separately to the contents and to the structure of the house.      For a $200,000 home, earthquake coverage can run about $300 a year, with higher rates for homes faced with brick or stone.      Insurance agents expected to be deluged with inquiries from jittery Puget Sounders yesterday.     But many agencies reported a quiet day. At the Allstate office in Wedgwood, agent Roger Belvill said he hadn't fielded a single earthquake-related call.     Bill Whitesel, an agent in Federal Way - near the quake's epicenter - said he received  a half-dozen inquiries about earthquake coverage.     But Ken Feather, a State Farm agent in Burien, said he received some 35 calls from customers eager for earthquake insurance.     He plans to call them back at the end of February to see if they're still interested.     While nearly all homeowners have insurance on their property, in part because mortgage companies require it, the industry estimates that only about 15 percent of Washington state homeowners have earthquake insurance.     Insurance commissioner Deborah Senn believes this may be because many consumers don't realize earthquake coverage is not included in their homeowner's policy.     She has drafted legislation that would require insurance companies to make this more explicit.     Her bill died in the state Senate last year, but Senn intends to try again this session.     Despite the high cost of insurance, there are indications that earthquake awareness is increasing. A few years ago, for instance, only 12 percent of Pemco's homeowners opted for earthquake coverage. Now, said Ray Lundeen, Pemco's head of marketing, more than  20 percent do. -----------------------------------------. Where to call.      Got a question about earthquake preparedness, either relating to you and your home and family or the Puget Sound area?      Give us a call on our Quake hotline at 382-8871 or write to us c/o Quake Questions, The Seattle Times, P.O. Box 70. Seattle, 98111
