PUYALLUP - Fire Department and school-district officials were apologizing yesterday for a flier they sent home with 16,000 schoolchildren this week predicting a catastrophic earthquake next month.     "We're kind of biting our lip over that one," said Cathy Fischer, secretary to the Puyallup fire chief. "We did receive many angry calls from parents, with children who were a little upset. They said, `Why should we work so hard to get straight A's if we're all going to die anyway?' "   The fliers, produced by members of the local Mormon church to announce their upcoming earthquake-preparedness seminars, said the Northwest would soon have a huge earthquake measuring 8 to 9.5 on the Richter scale.    The fliers also said that California geologist Jim Berkland, who "scientifically predicted the Jan. 28 quake within two days, predicts a much larger quake in May of 1995, with a magnitude of 7 or greater."    Said Berkland yesterday: "I don't know where they got that. That's not my prediction. I don't think they should put out these exorbitant statements. They want to get a lot of people frightened to attend these seminars and buy a lot of those survival kits."     Berkland, a believer in a century-old theory that gravitational forces that cause maximum tides can also trigger earthquakes, said he actually predicted a small to moderate quake, measuring no more than a 5, sometime this summer. Most scientists, however, say earthquakes can't be predicted.   The fliers said the seminars, at three schools in the Puyallup and Sumner school districts, were sponsored by "local fire departments, in conjunction with the American Red Cross."    In fact, they were produced by members of the Puyallup Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.     But the Puyallup Fire Department paid an undisclosed sum to print 16,000 fliers because, Fischer said, firefighters believe in earthquake preparedness and believed the fliers would mention only time, date and place of the seminars.   School-district administrators issued the fliers to schools to give to students because, said Ken Benny, director of elementary education, they thought they came from the Fire Department. "We really believed, and our intent was, to cooperate with our local agencies," Benny said. "We're looking into examining our screening process."      Additionally, Benny said, teachers had spent several days this week discussing earthquakes and telling students they couldn't be predicted.     Benny said he didn't know whether any kits were being sold at the seminars. "Clearly (we were told) this was not a venture for commercial purposes," he said. "That's a question that is always asked."      Ray Pettit, a self-employed crisis-management consultant and Mormon church member who presented the seminars, said that he was "concerned about the overall tone" of the flier but that he wasn't in charge of publicity.     Both Puyallup and Sumner fire-department officials said the seminars were professional and factual and they would work with church members again as long as they could first review their fliers. And both noted that attendance at these seminars - 450 people in Puyallup - was far higher than any in the past.    "They really had a turnout," Fischer said. "Maybe they just scared the hell out of people
