Seahawk owner Ken Behring's chances of convincing a jury that the Kingdome is too risky in an earthquake is far from hopeless if he can produce engineers as well as lawyers to take his side.     While Behring is arguably using Seattle's earthquake danger as a smokescreen to move the team to potentially more profitable Southern California, his Kingdome criticisms do have a point.     Engineers say the Kingdome is probably safer in an earthquake than many Seattle buildings - including the County Courthouse and county parking garage - but some add that officials may have gone too far in downplaying the danger.     The county's own July 1995 study says 152 columns, 120 beams and 84 joints between columns and beams "could" sustain "unacceptable damage" during the worst ground-shaking the stadium is likely to endure.     "It doesn't look right," warns Redmond structural engineer Ron Roberts, who is not a seismic expert but is familiar with the Dome from consulting work on its roof repair. He complains county officials are ignoring their own report's warnings.     That projected ground-shaking - while three times greater than what was recorded in Seattle during the 1965 quake of 6.5 magnitude - is only a third of what parts of Los Angeles experienced in the 6.6 magnitude Northridge quake in 1994, and less than half what Kobe, Japan, experienced in a 7.2 magnitude quake last year.     In other words, the "G-force" on which all the engineering calculations about the Kingdome are based, while defensible, also is debatable. The assumption does not take into account, for example, the chance of a major earthquake on the Seattle Fault near the stadium, the same fault thought to be responsible for a minor tremor in January last year.     Behring's attorney, William Temko of Los Angeles, would not share the names of engineers he said had analyzed the Kingdome report. He also said Behring has not yet readied a written study of his own. In a presentation to the National Football League recently, Behring's attorneys only quoted selected excerpts from King County's study - and lost.     Meanwhile, some local engineers who are expert in earthquake issues on Kingdome-type soils are declining to comment because they expect to be witnesses in a court showdown.Tough judgment call      That leaves the public and politicians with a difficult judgment call, balancing the risk of a worst-case earthquake - not seen here since pioneers arrived - with cost decisions and the possibility that earthquake-mitigation money might be better spent on public buildings with higher risks.      In a presentation to the county's Kingdome Renovation Task Force yesterday, a quartet of local engineers who had briefed NFL officials repeated their message that, in the words of Jon Magnusson of Dome-designer Skilling Ward Magnusson Barshire, "It is safe."      The Kingdome's mutually reinforcing network of hundreds of columns, cross braces and a concrete tension ring at the top of its wall makes it extremely unlikely there would be a catastrophic failure, such as the collapse of the 65-million-pound roof.     The county's proposal to spend $2 million to $3 million to wrap the columns and beams with a carbon fiber to prevent them from giving way also will alleviate concern any stands could collapse.     But some assumptions behind the county's reassurances seem as squishy as the former tide flat the Kingdome is built upon.     Puget Sound's biggest earthquake in living memory was a magnitude 7.1 near Olympia in 1949. Magnusson said the Kingdome originally was designed to withstand a 7.6 magnitude earthquake about 60 miles away, or a 6.6 magnitude earthquake about 40 miles away.     Since that time, local seismologists have found the Seattle Fault, which apparently caused a catastrophic earthquake here 1,100 years ago, plus evidence of major offshore-subduction-zone quakes every 300 to 900 years. The county hired the local The assignment was to make an updated estimate of how severe a sideways shaking the Kingdome might have to withstand.     This time the consultant considered an 8.5 subduction-zone earthquake off Washington's coast, a 7.5 deep-crustal earthquake directly beneath Seattle (similar to the 1949 and 1965 type of earthquake), and a 7.5 shallow earthquake (similar to a Seattle Fault quake) about 40 miles away, said John Hooper, one of the authors of the 1995 report.     The result was a maximum expected "ground acceleration" force, or sideways-shaking estimate, of 0.24 g. To be safe, the county's consultants pumped that up to 0.28 g. Confusing definition of terms      Although officials have been comparing that to a theoretical once-in-500-years earthquake, the engineering meaning is a bit different. Consultants were asked to measure the Kingdome's ability, in effect, to not kill anyone even if subjected to a "rare-event earthquake." This has been confusingly defined as the biggest earthquake that could be expected over 50 years - except for even bigger earthquakes that have only a 10 percent chance of occurring in that period. Or a 100 percent chance of occurring over 500 years.     "What that says is not that no earthquake will exceed that," explained University of Washington seismologist Bill Steele, "but that there is only a 10 percent chance over 50 years (the presumed life of a building) that level will be exceeded."      Using that figure, engineers estimated in 1995 that the concrete tension ring around the top of the dome's walls could move sideways as much as 13 inches (an estimate an inch less than a 1994 preliminary report), which they said "confirmed seismic weaknesses in the Kingdome structure."      While the dome's outside columns were projected by computer to hold up well, potential failure was projected for many inner columns.  But the Kingdome Renovation Task Force was assured yesterday that "unacceptable damage, relative to the life-safety objective," referred only to cracking of columns, not complete collapse.     The "life-safety objective" says a building may be allowed by code to sustain damage in a designed-for quake as long as it does not collapse and kill people.      The 0.28 g is reasonable if compared with ground motions around Puget Sound recorded in the past 50 years. It is also above the 0.25 g a new U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) study recommends for designs in this area.     But engineer Robert Mast, chairman of Berger/ABAM Engineers, noted yesterday that the USGS figure should be increased 20 percent to 50 percent in soft soils that lie under the Kingdome, suggesting ground acceleration as high as 0.4 g.     In the 1994 Northridge earthquake, ground motion hit 1 g in places; in Kobe, it hit 0.8 g, surprising engineers.     No records exist of how Kingdome-area soils shook in response to the distant 1949 or 1965 earthquakes.  Additionally, engineers have essentially ignored the chance of a major quake on the Seattle Fault right under the Kingdome because geologic records so far suggest such quakes are extremely rare. Engineers are uncertain      There is a layer of dirt under the Kingdome, from 10 to 25 feet in depth, expected to lose strength from what is called liquefaction during an earthquake. That could magnify ground motions. On the other hand, Kingdome pilings penetrate that layer and go as deep as 65 feet to firm glacial deposits, meaning the building might be isolated from such extra shaking. With no experience here to rely on, engineers aren't sure.     The county reports note it is unknown whether the pilings actually extend several feet into the glacial deposits, as designers recommended, or whether contractors stopped when the pilings simply hit the firmer ground.     No one suggests conditions are any better in Southern California, where Behring wants to move the Seahawks. The chance of earthquakes there, the UW's Steele noted, is roughly 10 times what it is here.     And Linda Noson, a seismic consultant with Dames & Moore, said expecting a blank check for earthquake safety is unrealistic. British Columbia investigated reinforcing its schools, she noted, and then abandoned the idea when the total price tag came to $4 billion.     "Let's do something," she advised. "We know wrapping the columns is far less expensive."      While discussion of seismic safety continues, King County Councilman Pete von Reichbauer has asked that an executive session be held Monday afternoon to discuss upgrading county earthquake insurance.      The county has a quake policy capped at $100 million. Its insurance company appraised the Kingdome last year at $140 million. The county, however, would undoubtedly qualify for disaster-relief money from the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Information from Seattle Times staff reporter Richard Seven is included in this report.Caption:  PHOTO: ILLUSTRATION1) BENJAMIN BENSCHNEIDER / SEATTLE TIMES: STRUCTURAL ENGINEER JON MAGNUSSON, LEFT, AND SEISMIC ENGINEER JOHN HOOPER DISCUSS THE KINGDOME'S EARTHQUAKE RESISTANCE ON ITS 300 LEVEL.2) CHRIS SOPRYCH / SEATTLE TIMES: KINGDOME QUAKE CONCERN (ILLUSTRATION NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY
