Still gasping from the $130 million debt on the present Kingdome? The $197 million estimate to remodel it? The $40 million needed to tear it down before starting over? The $320 million price for a new baseball stadium      Chump change.     California's Bay Area is planning to spend $750 million on the Golden Gate Bridge and $1 billion on the Oakland Bay Bridge to reinforce them for earthquakes, according to seismologist Bruce Bolt, professor emeritus at the University of California-Berkeley.     "Those are the corridors that keep those communities functioning," said Bolt at a lecture at the University of Washington last night.     It was coincidence his long-scheduled talk came just a week after a magnitude 5.3 earthquake shook the Seattle area.       The author of the book "Earthquakes" and an investigator of Puget Sound's 1965 magnitude 6.5 quake declined to comment on Kingdome safety.     Nor would he say what role earthquake planning should play in deciding the future of sports stadiums on the poor soils in that area.     Instead, he made clear just how complex the issue is - and how ultimately the choice between risk and cost must be political, not scientific.     Still, with a fault running under the Kingdome, earthquake science remains a wild card in stadium discussions.     Geologists plan to give a clearer estimate of the expected frequency of big earthquakes here later this year. Meanwhile:      --  Bolt pointed out that soils are as important as earthquake size and location in predicting damage. He said the glacial till that underlies most of Seattle "is not a bad foundation" but that fill soils such as those in the Pioneer Square-Kingdome area exaggerate ground motion.     --  He added that construction type is equally important. He showed a picture of a wood-frame house in the 1906 San Francisco earthquake in which the San Andreas fault ran through the front yard and moved the home's sidewalk about 10 feet away from its steps.     Yet the house flexed so well that windows did not even shatter.     On the other hand, weaker masonry and post-and-beam construction in Kobe, Japan, meant 100,000 of the city's 500,000 buildings were damaged beyond repair in last year's big quake, he said.     --  Bolt said earthquake engineering does work. Only seven of 2,000 bridges in the greater Los Angeles area collapsed after the 1994 Northridge earthquake and only one of those that collapsed was designed after engineering reforms prompted by the 1971 San Fernando quake.     --  Recovery from an earthquake hinges as much on politics as engineering, Bolt observed.     While San Francisco embroiled its repairs in public hearings and is still working on restoring a freeway toppled by the 1989 earthquake, Los Angeles ignored hearings and had its freeways repaired in six months.     Given enough money, engineers can build structures able to withstand all but the worst earthquakes, Bolt said. "The goal is to a have a situation where we can boast, `Let the earthquake come,' " he told the audience.
