The  magnitude 5.3 earthquake did not just shake the ground Thursday, it stirred up renewed debate about this area's preparation for a bigger earthquake and dangers ranging from Kingdome safety to Mount Rainier     Questions of risk and cost are complicated by imperfect understanding of Western Washington's geology plus complex technical questions about how best to measure and calculate quake dangers. Examples:      --  When inspectors checked the Kingdome for earthquake damage yesterday, they did so without any record of how badly the building had been shaken.     That's because Seattle and King County have not adopted suggested building-code policies requiring that large structures have earthquake-motion monitors, a Redmond manufacturer of the instruments complains.     "Right now there are no instruments in there, and that means (Kingdome safety) is a political football, not a factual football," said Marvin Crumb, president of Terra Technologies, which has deployed about 10,000 such monitors worldwide.     It's more a question of whether the data would be meaningful, countered Jon Siu, structural-plans engineering manager for Seattle's Department of Construction and Land Use. "It makes a lot of sense in California where there is a lot more seismic activity," Siu said. "But when (moderate to large) earthquakes come only once a year I'm not sure it's worth it to do all the buildings. What would we learn from it?"      --  By coincidence, the U.S. Geological Survey scientist in charge of remapping earthquake risk in the West had been invited to speak yesterday to researchers at the University of Washington.     Art Frankel said discovery several years ago of the Seattle Fault and a new risk-assessment approach by engineers could result in this area being bumped from Zone 3 to Zone 4 in seismic risk, similar to California.     Frankel, headquartered in Denver, expressed some skepticism such a change is necessary. But if adopted, it could push up the cost of construction and remodeling here for both homes and commercial buildings.     --  In a third reaction to the earthquake, which occurred near Duvall, USGS geologist Steve Malone said that even a relatively moderate quake could have triggered substantial damage if it had been close to Mount Rainier.     "Had this earthquake occurred under or near Rainier, it could cause slope instability and debris flow, mudflow, into the valley below," the scientist told reporters. Malone has been leading a team of researchers who regard the majestic volcano as a significant risk because an estimated 100,000 people live atop its ancient mudflows.     --  Scientists added that while Thursday's earthquake relieved pressure on a shallow crustal fault in the Cascade foothills, it neither increases nor reduces the chance of other earthquakes in the Puget Sound basin.     Geologists say the region is still about due for another of the deep crustal quakes that historically have occurred every few decades. The last one was in 1965.     Meanwhile, information on how the ground moved Thursday night was  initially sketchy. The UW said it is hoping to acquire new instruments that will give swifter readings of future quakes.     Terra Technologies' Crumb said the Kingdome could be equipped with three motion monitors for $15,000, allowing officials to determine how vulnerable its underlying soil is to shaking. But Crumb said that when he brought up the subject to city seismic analysts, "I determined these guys don't really care."      The city counters that most engineers agree the Kingdome is safer than many other public buildings. And Crumb's own monitors at his small plant showed only tiny ground motion in Redmond Thursday night, suggesting the Kingdome may have quivered so slightly that a motion detector might not have helped make decisions about needed repairs or replacement.     Still, Tacoma has installed motion sensors in its county-city building, Tacoma General Hospital and a fire station. The monitors are also widely used in California. Seattle's Siu acknowledged that better knowledge of ground motions might help decide how rigorous Seattle-area building codes should become.     In the meantime, USGS is nearing the end of a seismic remapping of the West that includes a new look at Western Washington. Frankel showed one map with a new bubble around the Seattle Fault, which runs west to east from Bainbridge Island and under Seattle and Bellevue to Lake Sammamish. By one calculation, the bubble suggests the Tacoma-to-Everett corridor might need to be designated a Zone 4, meaning buildings would be designed to withstand .4 g of force instead of the .3 g now in effect. (The g level measures sideways ground motion.)      Officials had no immediate estimate of how much that would add to building costs, but it could require beefier columns and beams, more fasteners, and more interior walls in new homes, making open floor plans more difficult.     Frankel added that on fill soil such as that supporting the Kingdome, the new calculations would suggest designing for ground accelerations as high as .6 g. That is roughly double what the county's 1995 earthquake-safety review used in its calculations that showed "unacceptable" cracking at the Dome would occur, though the structure would not collapse.     Frankel cautioned that he is not endorsing such a change. "I make a point not to comment on building-code issues," he said. "There are a lot of uncertainties here."      The change is based on assuming the Seattle Fault (which did not move Thursday) triggers a magnitude 7.2 earthquake every 5,000 years. The last big known quake on the fault occurred about 1,100 years ago.     The new map also hinges on a proposed switch in engineers' calculations. Rather than build for worst-case earthquakes expected once every 500 years, as is now the requirement, some engineers are proposing building for bigger earthquakes expected every 2,500 years but using an earthquake force only two-thirds the maximum expected in that period.     So many technical assumptions are used in arguing which approach is best that Frankel joked that turning imperfect geologic knowledge into public policy smacks of "witchcraft."      To remove some uncertainties, USGS is using magnetic readings of the Earth's crust to peer through the glacial debris around Puget Sound and map more of the fault system here, a program expected to extend into 1998.     But Crumb said officials have been slow to respond to new research highlighting earthquake dangers.     "We have our instruments all over the world except Washington and Oregon," he complained. "We're just totally unprepared here in Seattle, and we're going to get it one day. I don't want to sound like an ally of (Seahawk owner) Ken Behring, but there was a thread of truth running through his comments" about the earthquake safety of the Kingdome.Caption:  PHOTOMARK HARRISON / SEATTLE TIMES: JOE ROSS, GREG DAVIS AND KELLY FOSTER DON HARD HATS LAST NIGHT AFTER RETURNING TO THE KINGDOME FOR THE END OF THE MARINERS GAME SUSPENDED THURSDAY.
