Residents of the Puget Sound region were rattled last night by the most powerful earthquake to hit the area in 30 years. But when the half-minute of shaking stopped, the only notable consequences were a few minor injuries, some interrupted electrical power and telephone service, a few cracked walls and a halted scoring rally by the Seattle Mariners     The 5.3-magnitude quake was centered around the northeast King County town of Duvall but was felt as far away as Portland, Vancouver, B.C., and Coeur d'Alene, Idaho.     It was followed by dozens of small aftershocks, including a magnitude 3.0 at 9:02 a.m. today.     As many as 16,000 people were left without power, and some buildings suffered minor damage.     Seismologists said it was the largest quake in this area since a 6.5-magnitude quake in 1965, centered south of Seattle. For Western Washington as a whole, it was exceeded by a 5.5 earthquake in the south Cascades in 1981.     Last night's temblor occurred at 9:03 p.m. and was centered in the Cascade foothills a few miles east of Duvall, due north of Lake Joy.  Geologists said a similar-sized quake occurred in 1932.    "My car rocked. . . . I didn't know what had happened," said David Thayer, who was driving on a bridge near the epicenter when the quake hit. "I thought God landed."      The quake was measured at 5.4 by the U.S. Geological Survey's Earthquake Information Center in Colorado, but at 5.3 by the University of Washington Geophysics Center.     "A good jolt followed by a long roll" was how Duvall Deputy Fire Chief Bud Backer described it.     One woman, Laura Genthe, 32, of Duvall, suffered a bruised arm when she fell during the quake.     Genthe, a volunteer firefighter for four years who works as a medical assistant, was climbing some steps in her home a few blocks from downtown Duvall to check on her children when she slipped and fell.     Donna Stroud, a spokeswoman for Valley General Hospital in Monroe, Snohomish County, reported one person was injured by falling objects inside a house and another was kicked by a frightened animal.     The quake hit during the seventh inning of the game between the Mariners and the Cleveland Indians at the Kingdome.     While some fans headed to the exits, others chanted, "Let's Play Ball!" But the remainder of the game was postponed because of safety concerns. It will be continued at 5:35 p.m. today, before the regularly scheduled 7:05 p.m. game.      After an extensive inspection of the Kingdome today by as many as a dozen engineers, King County Executive Gary Locke said the facility had passed with flying colors.     About 16,000 customers of the Snohomish County Public Utility District were without electrical power in the Monroe, Clearview, Sultan and Everett areas as a result of the quake, said spokesman Andy Muntz. Service was restored at about 11 p.m.     Department of Transportation crews were reinspecting 1,150 bridges and overpasses today after quick inspections last night.     Standing under the Tolt River Bridge near Carnation, Archie Allen, the Department of Transportation's assistant supervisor for bridges, looked for cracked walls and chipped paint, telltale signs of significant damage. He found nothing. Allen said crews didn't find damage at other structures either.     The earthquake left about eight floor-to-ceiling cracks in the walls of the detention center at King County Department of Youth Services in Seattle. The cracks, considered superficial by a county building inspector, ran along the mortar in the masonry joints of the gym and corridor walls. The masonry joints are designed to help the building flex.     "The building did what it was supposed to do," said Mike Dykeman, King County building-inspection supervisor. He said inspectors would take a closer look at other county facilities, particularly around the Duvall area.     Police and fire officials throughout the region reported no accidents or traffic snarls related to the quake, although public-safety agencies throughout the region said they were inundated with phone calls immediately after the quake.     GTE last night reported problems with jammed phone lines. Slow and delayed dial tones greeted some people trying to use their phones  because of the large number of calls.     Burlington Northern Santa Fe Railroad slowed trains in a 50-mile radius around Seattle and had inspectors examining tracks, bridges and buildings, but no problems were found, said spokesman Gus Melonas.     Dorothy Dubia, Seattle Public Schools spokeswoman, said custodians found no earthquake-related damage at any facilities last night.     Diners admiring the night view from the Space Needle felt the jolt, but few rushed to the doors, said Space Needle Corp. spokeswoman Lynn Brackpool.     "The Needle is built to withstand up to a 9.3 earthquake," she said. "The base weighs considerably more than the whole structure, and it has a low center of gravity. Building engineers say it is one of the safest buildings in Seattle."      Ironically, the quake was centered almost directly beneath the home of Jim Ramey, the chief technician of the University of Washington's Seismology Lab. Ramey had just fallen asleep when the earthquake jolted him awake. "It was startling," he said.     While the temblor was felt from northern Oregon to the Canadian border, its size was more than 10 times smaller than the 1965 earthquake. Each full digit increase on the magnitude scale represents a tenfold increase in quake size.     But last night's earthquake was bigger than the 5.0 quake, centered under Vashon Island, that shook the Auburn Valley on Jan. 29, 1995.     The quake felt particularly severe for its size because it was shallow. It is estimated to have been centered only 3 miles deep in the Earth's crust. The 1965 earthquake occurred at a depth of about 40 miles.     Compared with earthquakes generally, however, "It's on the low end of moderate," said Seth Moran, a UW seismologist.     The earthquake was not tied to a mapped fault and was unusual in having apparently occurred on a north-south running fault, triggered by pressure of crust moving from west to east. Many Puget Sound-area faults, including the famous Seattle Fault, tend to run more east-west.     "It's not consistent with any model we have," said Craig Weaver of the U.S. Geological Survey, who began to deploy portable instruments last night to study aftershocks.  Additional digital seismic detectors were to be flown in from Denver today for study of small aftershocks expected to last several days or weeks. Information from Seattle Times staff reporters Jennifer Bjorhus, Louis T. Corsaletti, John de Leon, Bill Dietrich, Thomas W. Haines, Jack Broom, Anne Koch, Kimberly B. Marlowe, Christopher Solomon and Marla Williams, as well as material from The Associated Press, is included in this report.Caption:  PHOTO: MAP1) MARK HARRISON / SEATTLE TIMES: MARINER ANDY SHEETS LOOKS UP AT THE KINGDOME ROOF MOMENTS AFTER AN EARTHQUAKE SHOOK THE BUILDING LAST NIGHT.2) SEATTLE TIMES: EPICENTER NEAR DUVALL
