Power was out, phones were down and faint moans could be heard throughout the Safeco building near the University of Washington.     About 60 insurance company employees, members of a search-and-rescue team, jumped into action. Armed with flashlights and first-aid kits, they went looking for survivors. Some victims lay unconscious. One woman was preparing to give birth.     That scene wasn't played out Thursday night after the 5.3-magnitude earthquake, centered in Duvall, that shook Puget Sound. Rather, it was an earthquake-preparedness drill that the company held two weeks ago.     "You have to remember that this is our business," said Patricia Hillis, a spokeswoman for the Seattle-based insurer. "The nature of our business is to respond quickly . . . in the event of a disaster."      Like Safeco, many companies in the region have come to expect earthquakes. As a result, they have put into place plans to let their employees know what to do in the event of "the big one."      However, because  no local, state or federal regulations specifically mandate earthquake preparedness, each company does it in its own way.     Consider The Boeing Co., with more than 80,000 employees in the Puget Sound area. Because Boeing is so big, it can do things that few companies in the country could attempt, such as deploy its own fire department to conduct search-and-rescue operations.     On Thursday, when the Duvall earthquake sent tremors through the region, Boeing officials didn't think it necessary to send out the fire trucks. But they did send designated emergency-response volunteers into each of the company's buildings to check on employees.     Seafirst Bank stocks each of its floors with caches of emergency supplies such as backboards, and some even have equipment for temporary morgues.     The bank has spent "well over $1 million" preparing for a major emergency, said Gennie Thompson, contingency planning officer for the bank, which occupies portions of the 76-story Columbia Seafirst Center and the 42-story Fifth Avenue Plaza building downtown, as well as offices in Bellevue.     US West has a more difficult challenge. Not only does the phone company have to deal with its workers; it must also worry about the communications needs of the entire region - including those of rescue operations.     When the big one hits,  essential personnel will go to a command center three floors under the company's Seattle offices. Inside are beds, enough food for a week and all the computer technology needed to run the region's communications network 24 hours a day.     Although US West didn't send its people to the bunker on Thursday, it did in February, when major floods hit Western Washington and Oregon.  It also took advantage of an informal agreement among phone companies to help out in times of crisis: It asked for and received help from 25 crews from BC Tel in Canada  in repairing downed lines.     Because its business revolves around computers, Microsoft Corp. has to take steps to protect not only the 10,000-plus employees on its Redmond campus but its equipment, too. The Redmond facility has backup generators, buffers and power monitors to ensure that equipment is not destroyed by a power outage.      Many small businesses are more concerned with surviving day-to-day business operations and  lack the time and personnel to develop detailed  earthquake plans.     "You don't have the resources that you can pull on," said Edward Winston, co-owner of Philly's Best, a small sandwich shop in the Central Area.  "You don't think of a large disaster of that nature happening in Seattle, and you don't really plan for it. But it could really hurt small businesses."      Gary Brose of Fleet Foot Messenger Service said his company doesn't have an earthquake plan yet, although he thinks all businesses should develop them. Yet he said larger corporations have a greater need for a plan.     "That's one of the advantages of being in small business," he said. "You can roll with the punches and react to things as they occur. With fewer layers of management, you can make decisions and get the word out to people instantly."      Rich Tokarzewski, a program specialist with King County Emergency Services, said  no laws  require businesses to have an earthquake-response plan.     However, companies would have to comply with emergency-response requirements that are relevant, such as evacuation plans required by the Fire Department and guidelines for hazardous materials,  he said.     For instance, spokesmen for Puget Power and Washington Natural Gas said the utilities do not have earthquake plans that vary from plans for  disruptions, such as storms or accidents. However, like the phone company, they said they have reciprocal agreements with utilities in nearby states and Canada to bring in extra employees in the event of an emergency.     Companies such as Safeco need to be prepared, however, because many of their customers live in vulnerable areas.     Safeco, which is No. 2 in market share for home and auto insurance in the state, knows how to respond to disasters. In fact, the company was earthquake-proofing the elevators in its headquarters building in Seattle when Thursday's quake hit.     The company learned three years ago just how crippling an earthquake could be. Its regional office in Northridge, Calif., collapsed during the major quake there.     "Our employees were so traumatized with their own situations and families that they weren't able to deal with claims," Hillis said.     As a result, should a quake hit Seattle, the company has plans to fly in claims adjusters and personnel from different parts of the country.  The plan includes hotel rooms, rental cars - even cash, in case automated teller machines are down.
