Geology. It's the geologist's lot to trudge through calf-deep mud only to dig up more muck and clay. But when he finds something - uninteresting sediment to anyone else - the discovery can be energizing. And significant to figuring out the earthquake potential of the Northwest ------------------------------------------------------------------      EVERETT - After its tributaries drain the central Cascades of Snoqualmie and Stevens passes, the Snohomish River forms a tidewater delta of murky green water, meandering sloughs and sticky clay.     In other words, perfect earthquake hunting country.     Coated with mud, their canoe sloshing inside from an unwanted ballast of brown water, U.S. Geological Survey geologists Brian Atwater of Seattle and Sam Johnson of Denver recently skirted the delta banks.     The view was scenic but somber. Like a fist of gnarled fingers, the root balls of spruce killed centuries ago and mummified in mud jutted from banks that sweated water. A hawk screamed a warning from a diseased-looking spruce still standing. Except for a few farms, human habitation is perched on hillsides far across cattail marshes, kept at bay by frequent floods.     For centuries the Snohomish has flooded, "laying down layers of sediment like the pages of a book," Atwater said. If a big earthquake occurred here, those pages should preserve a record of it.     They do.     Beneath the Interstate 5 bridge that crosses the Snohomish, Atwater and Johnson plunged calf-deep in goo, scraping at the bank with growing excitement. Everywhere they looked, a line of sand the width of a pencil streaked horizontally beneath about 6 feet of silt. That deposit of sand, the scientists believed, could only have been laid down by a tsunami wave roaring up the estuary after an earthquake.     "That's spectacular!" marveled Johnson, who had not been on one of Atwater's mud-bowl trips before. "Every time you cut at the bank it gets better!"      This is nothing new to Atwater, who has found similar evidence of past earthquakes during 10 years of research along Washington's outer coast. But this tracery of sand is more chilling.     "There's something about doing this within sound of Interstate 5" that heightens its importance, he said. "On the coast, I know Portland and Seattle will feel a big offshore subduction zone quake, but this gives it an immediacy."      The tsunami signature was only one piece of evidence found. In other places, sand erupted upward through a cap of fine silt, a sign that the soils here underwent liquefaction when shaken and lost all strength and cohesion. That allowed pockets of sand to pop upward as a carbonated beverage would from a shaken bottle, leaving a blot like a blood stain at a crime scene.     There is also an abrupt transition in the buried and well-preserved plant life above and below the tsunami line. Until the earthquake came, the vegetation was dominated by plants such as bulrushes with limited tolerance for salt water. Above the tsunami line, plants switch to more salt-tolerant types, suggesting the Snohomish delta abruptly fell in elevation and its water became more brackish.     "This was a lot of shaking - a lot of shaking!" Johnson exclaimed.     The plant material was sent to a laboratory in Florida for dating. When alive, an organism's supply of carbon-14 remains constant as it is replenished by the atmosphere. When it dies, the radioactive isotope begins to decay, with half disappearing every 5,730 years. By measuring the amount of carbon-14 in the buried plants, scientists can estimate the earthquake's age.     The result suggests this shaking came not from the nearby South Whidbey Island Fault, but from the Seattle Fault temblor that shook this area so severely 1,100 years ago that landslides thundered into Lake Washington and parts of Alki Point, and Bainbridge Island jutted skyward as much as 20 feet.      That may be good news for Everett. It means the Whidbey Fault discovered two years ago and possibly linked to the May 2 magnitude 5.3 earthquake centered at Duvall does not, so far, appear responsible for huge earthquakes.     In this case, the science started in the mud, and will likely continue there. Atwater and Johnson immediately began discussing which scientists they could recruit to map in detail the delta's record of a big quake. "This tells a good story," Atwater explained. "I want to do this right."      The Snohomish delta search was the latest in a series of geological quake hunts in Western Washington that, in the past 10 years, have radically revised scientific estimates of earthquake potential here.     Until 1987, officials assumed the worst we have to brace for here are moderate earthquakes similar to the 7.1 that shook the area in 1949 or the 6.5 in 1965.     Then Atwater announced that his canoe-borne examination of muddy banks in the estuaries of southwest Washington showed catastrophic drops in land elevation of up to 6 feet at least six times in the past 7,000 years, the most recent about 300 years ago. Further study found evidence of as many as 33 big quakes over the past 12,000 years.     Many of the quakes are caused by the subduction of the ocean floor under this part of North America. Scientists are still debating whether the size of the subduction zone off Oregon and Washington suggests a series of severe magnitude 8.5 earthquakes occurred each time or a single catastrophic earthquake of up to 9.5, 10 times as great.     Either would be immense. A magnitude 8.5 earthquake off Chile in 1960 produced a tsunami 40 feet high and 5,700 deaths, while a 1964 magnitude 8.4 earthquake in Alaska killed 131 and destroyed Valdez, Portage and much of Seward and Anchorage.     The plot thickened in 1992 when scientists found a fault running under central Seattle near the Kingdome. The fault occurs at a division in the level of underlying bedrock, producing the second biggest transition in surface gravity in the United States: You actually weigh slightly more at Southcenter than Northgate because the bedrock is half a mile thicker in the south half of the city.     Two years ago, a new fault called the South Whidbey Island Fault was discovered running across the southern end of that island toward Everett after examination of old oil-company exploration maps.     Then a magnitude 5.0 earthquake centered at Vashon Island rattled this area on Jan. 29, 1995, possibly linked to the Seattle Fault. A magnitude 5.3 followed on May 2 of this year, with geologists speculating it could be on a link between the Whidbey Fault and the Rattlesnake Mountain Fault west of North Bend.     Now studies are expected to be published later this year sharply increasing estimates of the chances for a major earthquake in Western Washington. Meanwhile, the U.S. Geological Survey is completing work on maps that have engineers debating whether seismic building codes should be toughened to California standards in jurisdictions around the Seattle Fault.     It all started with Atwater grubbing in the mud. In the Snohomish delta, both geologists were wet to their thighs, spattered with filth and so excited they only reluctantly drifted for a while at slack tide to eat.     The initial explorations just east of downtown Everett were not promising. The water was cold, the mud foul and sticky and after each bout of digging with trenching tools, the wet bank still looked just like a wet bank.     As the scientists paddled downriver, however, the dividing line marking the quake became more and more evident. By the time the Snohomish flowed under Interstate 5, the tsunami line frequently marked a ledge in the mud where the bank naturally erodes.     Atwater drove a probe into the muck to lift out a core of silt and sand he scraped at with an old hunting knife. He studied the layering of old roots for clues to past changes, scraped at the rings of an old cedar stump and followed muddy ravines cut by small creeks back into the underbrush.     Why was the spruce forest so sickly? Another sign of slumping land? Could tree rings help calibrate disturbances? He and Johnson fired ideas back and forth.     By the end of the day, they had a triumphant find and the need for weeks of research this summer to map, date and reconstruct a delta earthquake that changed an ecosystem in a couple of minutes.     Atwater, paddling his way back in time, was in his element. "As someone who is not facile at differential equations," he quipped, "it's nice someone like me can still make a contribution - with a shovel." ------------------------------------- New books detail our geologic history -------------------------------------      Are you shaken by recent discoveries of huge prehistoric earthquakes here?      The Pacific Northwest has some of the most fascinating, tumultuous geology on the planet and is home to the biggest floods, some of the biggest lava flows and the most spectacular volcanic explosions on record.     Two new books provide an overview of this region's complex geologic history.     "Northwest Exposures: A Geologic Story of the Northwest," (Mountain Press, $24) is by University of Montana geologists David Alt and Donald Hyndman, who write and edit the popular "roadside geology" series of books. Aimed at lay readers and thick with maps and illustration, the book covers 3.5 billion years of time and explains the origin of our landscape and concludes with a discussion of the earthquake research.     A bit more technical but equally comprehensive and well-illustrated is "Geology of the Pacific Northwest" (McGraw-Hill, $39) by University of Oregon geologists William and Elizabeth Orr.Caption:  PHOTO: MAP1) PEDRO PEREZ / SEATTLE TIMES: BRIAN ATWATER, U.S. GEOLOGICAL SURVEY GEOLOGIST, SEARCHES FOR ANCIENT EVIDENCE OF EARTHQUAKES WITH A GROUP ALONG STEAMBOAT SLOUGH.2) A GEOLOGIST SCRAPES SILT ALONG THE SLOUGH'S BANKS.3) THIS LINE OF SAND, BETWEEN LAYERS OF SILT, IS THE EARTHQUAKE EVIDENCE THE GEOLOGISTS SOUGHT.  IT IS BELIEVED TO HAVE BEEN DEPOSITED BY A TSUNAMI, UNLEASHED BY AN ANCIENT EARTHQUAKE.4) SEATTLE TIMES: CANOE ROUTE (MAP NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY
