LOS ANGELES - Multibillionaire investor Warren Buffett is betting that no big earthquake will devastate California before March 31, 2001.    And that, according to a principal adviser to the new California Earthquake Authority, seems like a very good bet indeed.    Buffett's Berkshire Hathaway  has agreed to sell the state-run earthquake insurance agency $1.5 billion of reinsurance for four years, in return for a premium of $590 million, it was disclosed over the weekend.    Earthquake Authority actuary John Drennan said yesterday that calculations of annual quake probabilities indicate there is only one chance in 20 that Buffett will have to pay out so much as a penny in return for that premium. Terms for paying the premium were not disclosed , but reinsurance premiums are routinely paid early on in the agreement.    Reinsurance means that an insurer - the newly created state earthquake authority - pays a premium in exchange for a commitment that the reinsurer - in this case, the Buffett company - will pay damage claims above a certain amount, or, alternately, a percentage of the claims above that amount.    According to the terms of the agreement reached Friday between the earthquake authority and Buffett's company, if damage from any quake in the next four years exceeds $7 billion in damage claims, then Buffett's Omaha, Neb.-based company would pay the next $1.5 billion in claims.    Richard Wiebe, spokesman for Insurance Commissioner Chuck Quackenbush, said the $590 million premium might seem high. But Wiebe said state officials calculate it will still be cheaper than paying interest on bonds, which the earthquake authority had originally planned to sell to buttress its resources.    Buffett, who with $15 billion is ranked second to Microsoft's Bill Gates as the United States' richest man, could not be reached for comment.    If a huge quake were to occur, with claims surpassing the $7 billion threshold, Buffett's company would have to pay out up to $910 million, on top of the $590 million premium, which would have to be returned.    Drennan stressed that the $7 billion figure refers only to damage that would have to be paid by the quake authority.    In the 1994 Los Angeles earthquake, private insurance companies paid out $8.5 billion in residential damage claims.    But under the new law, the state coverage - while costing policy-holders more than such insurance did before the Los Angeles quake - covers less than half of what it had before.    By raising the deductible to 15 percent, by exempting garages, pools, fences, landscaping and outbuildings from coverage altogether, and by limiting coverage of a home's contents to $5,000 and extra living expenses to $1,500, the state authority's payout in a new Los Angeles quake of the same size would be only $4 billion.
