Nearly two-thirds of those injured in the 1994 Los Angeles earthquake did not speak English, researchers learned afterward, and one fruit of that discovery debuted yesterday in Seattle.     A one-hour earthquake-preparation workshop delivers a combination of video, printed materials and human teaching in five non-English languages common in quake-prone areas: Spanish, Korean, Mandarin, Cantonese and Vietnamese.     The American Red Cross previewed the "Living with Earthquakes" video  in Seattle because the region is vulnerable to quakes and the agency hopes to reach volunteers who could help their ethnic communities prepare. This month is the anniversary of the 1994 Northridge earthquake in suburban Los Angeles and last year's Kobe, Japan, earthquake.     After the Northridge quake, a Centers for Disease Control and Prevention study found that 65 percent of the people injured didn't speak English.     "The conclusion we drew was that people weren't able to easily access preparedness information in their languages," said Red Cross spokeswoman Heather Knox.     The five languages picked for the initial video and workshop program are those spoken by most non-English-speaking populations in areas affected by recent quakes, according to the CDC study. Fewer than 2.8 percent of people who speak all other non-English languages combined have been injured in earthquakes.     Findings about where people turn for emergency information also influenced the choice of a video-instruction format.     In  a 1994 Federal Emergency Management Agency survey, among Asian-Americans, 80 percent said they would watch TV, 62 percent would listen to radio, and 56 percent would turn to a respected elder or community leader for information. Only one-half of 1 percent would use printed material as a source of information.     The video project was funded by a $50,000 grant from the AT&T Foundation.     Eliza V. Del Rosario, managed-care director for the Asian Counseling & Referral Service in Seattle, said she would welcome the program in even more languages, such as Cambodian and Laotian, noting that 22 Asian languages are spoken in Seattle.
