New studies of the Seattle Fault, which runs under the Kingdome, could be both good and bad news for the stadium.     The studies are part of a $4 million, four-year project headed by Craig Weaver of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) to study hazards in King, Snohomish, Pierce, Thurston and Kitsap counties.     An airplane survey that measured earth-magnetic changes on each side of the fault - which runs from Bainbridge Island across Seattle to Lake Sammamish - indicates it may dive more steeply than previously thought, though interpretation of the data is not complete.     That could be good news, meaning the sloping fault may not be responsible for the 5.5 magnitude earthquake of January 1995 centered under Vashon Island. This suggests that the Seattle Fault, which produced a catastrophic earthquake 1,100 years ago, may move as rarely as Kingdome seismic engineers are betting.     Less encouraging news comes from a boat survey of the fault under Puget Sound. It showed, said Weaver, that "the fault zone may not be a single line but a jumble of strands, some active and some not active." That could make the Seattle Fault more difficult to ignore - or understand - as a risk.     Both studies are preliminary, and no attempt to map the recently discovered fault across Seattle itself has even started yet. "Is the earthquake risk once every 10,000 years or once every 500 years?" Weaver said geologists are asking. "If it's the latter, there's a chance our (building) code requirements have to go up."      Next week the USGS is meeting to decide what direction the $4 million study should take. The original idea was to simply integrate existing knowledge about earthquakes, floods, volcanoes and other natural hazards into an integrated package so politicians could make more intelligent choices in assessing risk and spending money to mitigate it.     It would be the first such study in the nation.     Weaver, however, is going to argue that the earthquake question has become so urgent that at least some of the money should go into fault and soil mapping "to narrow the uncertainties."      If that happens, scientists will know in three to five years much more about Seattle's seismic danger, said Art McGarr, a USGS geologist and section chief of the Western Earthquake Hazards Team in Menlo Park, Calif.     As to the immediate debate about safety of Seattle's domed stadium, McGarr was skeptical that the earthquake-ground-motion figure engineers have used to evaluate the Kingdome is  large enough.     Engineers have used a measurement of ground acceleration equal to .24 and .28 g to estimate how much strain the stadium must withstand. King County consultant Shannon and Wilson has suggested a maximum acceleration of .32. This is roughly in line with new USGS maps, still being reviewed, suggesting that the Puget Sound basin should design structures for quakes in the .25 to .30 g range.     But Art Frankel, the USGS geologist in Golden, Colo., who headed the mapping project, cautioned that the Seattle Fault is not included in the mapping estimates. While King County's engineering consultants are claiming the map supports their contention that earthquake risk at the Kingdome is small, Frankel said the map is not precise enough to do that.     And McGarr, citing ground motions of .85 g in the 1995 Kobe earthquake, .9 in the 1994 Northridge (Los Angeles) earthquake, and .55 in the 1989 Loma Prieta (Bay Area) earthquake, questioned whether .28 adequately reflects new earthquake knowledge around Seattle.     "From the ground motions in those three recent earthquakes, I'd say definitely not," he said. "I think they should be designing to a much higher acceleration than that."      California building code calls for structures to be designed for .4 g, and there is a proposal that buildings near critical faults should be built to .8 g.     The Kingdome was originally built to easily withstand earthquakes such as those seen here historically in 1949 and 1965. The problem now is geologic discovery of more devastating but infrequent earthquakes before pioneers arrived.
