MOSCOW - A top Russian nuclear official today dismissed U.S. suspicions that Moscow carried out an underground nuclear test, saying a tremor in the north was the result of "an ordinary earthquake."     A tremor with magnitude 3.5 was recorded in the Arctic Kara Sea 12 days ago, just east of  the Novaya Zemlya archipelago, a longtime Soviet test site for nuclear weapons, according to reports from Norway.    Underground nuclear tests were banned under the Comprehensive Nuclear Test Ban Treaty, a pact signed by the United States, Russia and scores of other countries. But the treaty has not been ratified in Moscow or by the U.S. Senate.     Russia has no legal obligation to refrain from nuclear tests. But Moscow declared a unilateral moratorium on testing in 1992, shortly after it completed its last test series.    The United States also declared a voluntary end to nuclear tests in 1992 and has signed but not ratified the treaty. Nations are normally expected to abide by treaties they have signed while ratification is pending, but there is no obligation under international law to do so.     State Department and Pentagon officials said  yesterday that initial indications suggested an underground explosion was touched off in the area, and the Americans were asking the Russians about the event. Norway and Finland also has asked for an explanation.    Russia's Atomic Energy Minister Vyacheslav Mikhailov, a veteran of the Soviet nuclear program, insisted there were no grounds for concern.    "An ordinary earthquake took place in the Kara Sea, 60 miles away from Novaya Zemlya," Mikhailov told the ITAR-Tass news agency. "This is a seismic area and everybody knows it."    A Pentagon spokesman said yesterday that while preliminary indications pointed to an underground explosion, the Pentagon was unable to determine the exact nature of the event.      Earthquakes and other seismic phenomena could register in the same manner, said the spokesman, Navy Capt. Michael Doubleday.  After raising concerns with Moscow about another suspicious signal in early 1996, the Clinton administration determined it had been caused by an earthquake.      The island site, roughly 550 miles from Norway, experiences seismic "events" caused by natural phenomena on the average of once a week, and some - particularly earthquakes near the Earth's surface - can be confused with manmade explosions, according to U.S. officials and independent experts.       An official of the pro-disarmament Union of Concerned Scientists said the incident offers proof that the comprehensive test-ban treaty  can be monitored and enforced.    Nevertheless, when the treaty comes up for ratification in the Senate, the controversy is expected to be cited by opponents of the treaty as proof that the Russians cannot be trusted to abide by the pact.    The issue is complicated by U.S. intelligence satellite data indicating that Russian scientists have been unusually active at the test site in the past few months.    Russian officials have explained that they are conducting or preparing to conduct so-called "sub-critical" nuclear tests, in which chemical explosions are used to blow apart fissile material but no nuclear chain reaction occurs.      The Energy Department conducted sub-critical tests earlier this summer, sparking protests from peace groups alleging they violated the spirit of the test ban treaty. Compiled from Associated Press, Los Angeles Times and Washington Post reports.Caption:  MAPAP: RUSSIA (MAP NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY)
