A shallow earthquake shuddered from an epicenter in Southeast Seattle last night, jangling some nerves but causing no apparent damage or injuries.     Residents in some parts of the city reported feeling a strong shake or rolling motion as the 3.5-magnitude quake hit at 8:27 p.m.     But others felt only a subtle bump and mistook it for something else, such as the rumble of a passing truck or the falter of an aging elevator.     "Oh, that's what that was," said Earl Brannon, a security guard at the Medical Dental Building in downtown Seattle, who felt a jolt as he was taking the elevator from the 17th floor to the lobby.      Bill Steele, coordinator of the University of Washington Seismology Lab, said the earthquake was centered just east of Boeing Field in Seattle.     Seismologists detect about six earthquakes a year of this size in the region, Steele said, but not all of them are felt. Some are too deep or too far from residential areas to be noticed.     Yesterday's quake, Steele said, was inside the city limits, just a tenth of a mile below ground.     An aftershock measuring 2 on the Richter Scale followed 12 minutes after the quake.     But Lois Romer and Nancy Schmauder, who were cheering the Seattle Reign women's basketball team through overtime at the Mercer Arena during the quake, didn't notice a thing.     "It was rockin' in there," Romer said. "It would've taken an 8.0 on the Richter scale for anyone to notice."      Ken Engler was lying on the floor of his apartment on Avalon Way not far from the West Seattle Bridge, talking on the phone to a friend.     "It felt like I was in a bed and someone was shaking it," Engler said.     Christine McIntosh, who was chatting with her friend Heather Rice at the Rocksport Bar and Grill in West Seattle, said it would take more than yesterday's quake to get her attention.     "I'm from California," she said. "I only feel it if it's really big." Seattle Times staff reporter Florangela Davila contributed to this report.Caption:  MAPSEATTLE TIMES: EARTHQUAKE EPICENTER
