QAEN, Iran - A powerful earthquake devastated 200 villages in the remote mountains of northeastern Iran yesterday, killing at least 2,000 people and injuring 5,000. Survivors frantically pulled victims from collapsed buildings and rushed them to makeshift emergency centers    Iran appealed for international aid for the stricken villages and towns, many of them cut off by landslides triggered by the quake. Iranian volunteers hurried to the region to help dig out the dead and injured, state-run radio said.    Iranian authorities early today said the death toll had increased to at least 2,000, according to state-run Tehran radio. The figure was nearly double the 1,100 reported yesterday.    People slept in Qaen's streets last night, shivering in the 41-degree air but too frightened to go indoors, fearing that further quakes would strike the region. Ten thousand homes collapsed in Qaen, the official Islamic Republic News Agency said.    The earthquake struck at 12:28 p.m. with a moment magnitude of 7.1, according to the U.S. Geological Survey in Golden, Colo. It was centered 65 miles north-northeast of Birjand, near Qaen, about 70 miles west of the Afghan border.    Most of the damage occurred in the 60-mile stretch between Birjand and Qaen, a region dotted by poor villages and mud huts. The Iranian news agency said there was considerable damage in Afghanistan, but gave no other details.    "I was outside when I heard the mountain roar like a dragon, and suddenly the air became dark as night from the thick cloud of dust," one survivor, Gholamreza Nowrouz-Zadeh, said.    More than 100 children, including all six of his grandchildren, were killed when the schoolhouse collapsed in his village of Ardakul, about 60 miles east of Qaen, he said.    Nowrouz-Zadeh was one of about 300 injured people, many bleeding profusely, who were sent to a makeshift care center at Shahid Aminzadeh stadium.    President Hashemi Rafsanjani, on a visit to Tajikistan, sent his condolences to quake victims and their families, the Islamic Republic News Agency reported.    The radio broadcast a desperate appeal for surgical teams, medical supplies, tents, food, water tankers and ambulances. It said water and power lines to the stricken villages had been severed.    Most of the villagers in the region are subsistence farmers who tend camels or sheep or grow wheat and saffron. Many of the injured looked weak and malnourished.    Mashhad, the capital of Khorasan province and 75 miles north of Qaen, is the nearest place equipped to deal with large numbers of injured - but it is a five-hour drive over rough terrain. Some of the villages are more than 90 miles from a hospital, an official in the governor's office in Birjand said.    State-run Tehran radio earlier had reported 40,000 people were injured, but Nasser Arbabi, an official at the station, later said the figure was incorrect.    It was the strongest earthquake to strike Iran since two powerful temblors hit northwestern Gilan and Zanjan provinces on June 21, 1990. About 50,000 people were killed and 60,000 injured in the quakes, which had magnitudes of 7.3 and 7.7.    The last major quake to hit Khorasan struck on Sept. 16, 1978, killing 25,000 people. That temblor, one of the most powerful to hit Iran, measured 7.7. Iran is prone to earthquakes and experiences scores of small tremors every year.    The moment magnitude form of measuring quakes is related to the size of the earthquake fault and the amount the ground slips, as determined by analysis of seismic waves. The new magnitude values differ slightly from those of the Richter scale, which is no longer widely used by seismologists.Caption:  MAPAP: THE EARTHQUAKE IN IRAN
