QAEN, Iran -  Iran today lowered the death toll from the weekend earthquake, saying 1,560 people had been killed and 2,810 injured.     Interior Ministry official Rasul Zargar, interviewed by the official news agency IRNA in Qaen, gave the latest figures. There was no explanation for earlier official reports that about 2,400 had died and 6,000 were injured in Saturday's quake. The Tehran newspaper Resalat said the quake claimed 4,000 lives.     Rescuers struggled to find shelter today for some 100,000 people left homeless, and the government promised the survivors money and aid in rebuilding their lives.    The 7.1-magnitude quake leveled homes and mud huts across this farming region 450 miles east of Tehran, the capital, and near-freezing temperatures at night have been threatening survivors.    Plane loads of tents, blankets and food were arriving from neighboring countries, including the oil-rich Persian Gulf. The United States, long a vociferous critic of the Iranian government, yesterday pledged $100,000 to the Red Cross for the earthquake victims.    In the days since the quake, the region has been hit by scores of aftershocks, some powerful. A 60-mile stretch between the towns of Birjand and Qaen, near the Afghan border, suffered the most damage. Aftershocks hit area     A new jolt late yesterday struck with a force of 4.8 on the Richter scale as rescue teams searched among the rubble of 200 villages.    Zargar said 10,500 tents, 25,000 blankets and large quantities of food and clothing had been given to survivors, most of whom were wandering in the rubble of their ruined homes and burying their dead.     Villagers digging with spades and their bare hands yesterday pulled out a woman alive from the rubble of her home.     Quake-prone Iran is accustomed to dealing with natural disasters but has appealed through the United Nations for aid. It asked for food, medicine, tents, clothing, water tanks, cookers, ambulances and four-wheel-drive vehicles. Lessons from '78 quake     A quake with a magnitude of 7.7 struck the same region in 1978, killing 25,000 people.    Since then, the government has built more roads and hospitals. It has set up National Disaster Headquarters in all major towns and cities and provided emergency crews with mobile hospital units.    It also has tried to make new buildings more earthquake-resistant.    Nevertheless,  Zargar complained that some of the government buildings were not properly engineered to withstand earthquakes.    He was especially critical that schools, rural clinics and administration buildings had fallen - despite better construction methods mandated after the 1978 quake.     The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies appealed yesterday for $8.2 million to help Iran.     President Hashemi Rafsanjani visited the stricken areas yesterday and pledged that the government would help rebuild the villages and construct quake-resistant buildings.    Rafsanjani promised that his government would start rebuilding homes within a month. He also pledged interest-free loans as well as grants to surviving families.    As his motorcade drove through the devastation, thousands mobbed his car, some clinging to the vehicle.    Others chanted the traditional greeting, "Khoshamadi," or "Welcome." At one point, Rafsanjani got out and hugged an old woman who had lost her husband. ------------------- Iran earthquake aid -------------------      --  U.S. aid: Despite economic sanctions imposed on Iran for sponsoring terrorism, the U.S. has contributed $100,000 to the Red Cross to assist victims of the quake.     --  How to help: People wishing to help Red Cross can send donations through one of the following methods:      --  Send a check to Red Cross Disaster Relief Fund/Iran Earthquake, c/o Seattle-King County Red Cross, 1900 25th Ave. S., Seattle, WA 98144.     --  Call national Red Cross at 1-800-HELPNOW. Donations can be made by credit card.     --  Make a secured credit-card donation through the Web site: http://www.redcross.orCaption:  PHOTOMOHAMAD SAYAD / AP: IRANIAN PRESIDENT  HASHEMI RAFSANJANI, RIGHT, INSPECTS DAMAGE YESTERDAY FROM THE EARTHQUAKE THAT DEVASTATED THE EASTERN PART OF THE COUNTRY ON SATURDAY.
