TEHRAN - The official death toll in northwest Iran rose to 965 today as rescue workers searched the mountainous region to assess damage from a second quake to hit the area in two days.     The Interior Ministry reported 965 confirmed dead and more than 2,600 injured, the official Iranian news agency IRNA reported from Ardabil, capital of the stricken province bordering Azerbaijan. Aid workers and rescuers who visited the devastated villages estimate that 3,000 died.     About 36,000 people in 82 villages in the region had suffered losses in Friday's quake, which registered 5.5 on the Richter scale, it said.     The quake was followed by more than 350 aftershocks in heavy snow and sub-freezing conditions.     A second quake yesterday, measuring 5.2 on the Richter scale, jolted the rugged region and prompted rescue teams to comb the area for new damage and casualties.    Friday's quake was the most devastating of several Asian temblors in recent days; others hit in Armenia, China and Pakistan.     An Iranian Red Crescent official said no reports had been received yet but some casualties were expected in the latest quake.     State-run Tehran radio said earlier that yesterday's tremor and its aftershocks destroyed some buildings in areas already damaged on Friday, prompting residents to flee their homes in fear.     Power has been cut in most towns and villages, it said.      In the wealthy farming community of Shiran,  one of the few people who remained, Reza Azizvand, estimated that half the village's people were killed - including his wife of five months.    "We loaded the dead in bulldozers, dug a mass grave and buried all the dead there, one beside the other," Azizvand said, as he sat in the one room left of his house.    At the cemetery, the names of the dead were written by hand on large wooden slates dug into the ground. Among Iran's overwhelmingly Shiite Muslim population, mass graves are considered an insult and are a last resort for burial.      Iranian media said the army and the Revolutionary Guards had joined about 5,000 relief workers already involved in rescue operations.     Seifollah Vahid Dastjerdi, the head of the Red Crescent, said 60 ambulances, 127 trucks and vans and two helicopters were transferring relief workers and supplies to and injured people from the stricken region. He said that Switzerland, Britain, Japan and some international relief organizations had offered to send aid.     Michael Schulenburg, U.N. resident coordinator in Tehran, said the United Nations was trying to mobilize international aid, which Iran had said it would welcome.     "We have a U.N. team visiting the area today to draw up a complete list of what kind of aid is needed. There is urgent need for food. Also for blankets, water and heaters," Schulenburg said.     Conditions are bad, he added; snow was still falling, and access to villages was proving difficult.     Ardabil, one of Iran's coldest regions, is an agricultural province inhabited mainly by the Azeri minority. Material from Associated Press is included in this report.Caption:  PHOTOMOHAMMAD SAYYAD / CP PHOTO: VILLAGERS REST NEAR THE RUINS OF THEIR HOMES DESTROYED IN FRIDAY'S QUAKE IN SHIRAN, IN NORTHWESTERN IRAN.  A SECOND QUAKE HIT THE AREA YESTERDAY.
