TEHRAN, Iran - Sprawling across hill and valley in a vast jumble of mid- and high-rise concrete apartment blocks against the majestic Elburz Mountains, this city of 14 million people looks nothing if not solid    Yet Tehran could be as ephemeral as the melting mountain snows that tumble through its gutters, warns Bahram Akasheh, the country's top seismologist. And if his most dire forecasts are accurate, millions of people could be killed.    From his office at Tehran University's Institute of Geophysics, Akasheh has been sounding alarms about the future of Iran's capital. To his frustration, few people are taking his suggestions seriously.    "Every day the danger from an earthquake is getting bigger and bigger as more people come from the rural areas to the city," Akasheh said. "Every day I see new houses and new high-rise buildings going up in the direction of the mountains. Who gives the permission to build such high-rises, exactly on the most fractured zone?"     Iranians know all about the devastating effects of earthquakes. In the last three decades alone, more than 100,000 people have been killed in this country in earthquakes. A major quake in eastern Iran just last month killed more than 1,400.    Akasheh believes that a magnitude 7.9 earthquake will strike Tehran. A powerful temblor struck the same area 160 years ago, killing thousands.    Today, the city would be obliterated in a matter of seconds, Akasheh said. "I know the place. I know the magnitude. But I do not know the time."       After 1990, Iranian authorities decreed new construction in Tehran would have to meet tough seismic standards. But Akasheh estimates that 99% of the buildings were built before 1990 and are inadequate.    Akasheh has urged the government to move the capital, but has been told the country cannot afford it. Short of that, he thinks a shadow government should be established outside the capital, ready to take over if Tehran is wiped out.    "Our forecast is that one day, we will have no more Tehran," he said.
