NIR, Iran - Rescue teams fought snow, high winds and wild dogs yesterday as they tried to bring help to an earthquake-devastated region in northwest Iran. Doctors and aid workers said the death toll was in the thousands    The quake rocked mountainous Ardabil province Friday afternoon, damaging 83 villages - some were razed - and injuring 2,000 people, state-run Tehran radio said.    It said the official death toll had risen to 500, but rescue and aid workers estimated at least 3,000 people had died.    The Iranian quake was one of several that have hit Asian countries in the past two days, including quakes in Armenia, China and Pakistan. Scientists said there was no evidence any of them were connected.    In Iran, rescue teams bearing tents and emergency food for the stricken villages on the edge of the Talish Mountains, 365 miles northwest of the capital, Tehran, were slowed by snowstorms, whipping winds and landslides.    Some rescuers also had to face wild dogs and wolves, which were eating corpses in the village of Golestan, where at least 80 people died.    An aid worker there said he heard a cry for help from a pile of rubble but wild dogs around the spot kept him from getting nearer.    Doctors at Nir's Fatemi Hospital said the death toll in the region was in the thousands. A teacher  said he counted 2,000 dead taken to the cemetery in nearby Ardabil.    Iran estimated the quake's magnitude at 5.5. The U.S. National Earthquake Information Center in Golden, Colo., said it was 6.1.    A more powerful quake struck western Pakistan on Friday, killing at least 100. Pakistan and Iran are hit by numerous quakes each year.    Other areas in the region also were rocked by quakes yesterday, including far western China, where two people were killed, state seismologists said. The magnitude-6 quake struck  in the Xinjiang region, about 2,000 miles west of Beijing.    In Armenia, a quake struck near the capital, Yerevan, but there were no reports of damage or injuries. Japan was hit by a moderate quake centered 20 miles off the coast, not far from Tokyo.
