KIRKLAND - The early returns are in, and this merger of city and suburban schools looks bad for Eastside basketball teams in the KingCo 4A Conference.     Franklin traveled across the lake for the first time last night and beat Lake Washington 73-61 on its home court. The Quake likes its new league. The players feel it's more competitive than the Metro League they left behind, but their goals go far beyond winning the new conference's championship.     "Our goal is to get to state and win state," said guard Jimmy Haywood, who scored 19 points.     Franklin didn't make the state tournament last season for the first time in Coach Ron Drayton's seven-year career. Outside the bus that would take them back to the city, Haywood and Anthony Lewis talked about how much that hurt and how much they want to erase the memory from their minds. They certainly looked capable of doing so last night.     Lake Washington (0-1 in KingCo 4A, 1-2 overall) was supposed to be Franklin's primary challenger in the Lake Division, but the Earthquake dominated defensively early. The Quake forced Lake Washington into 14 first-half turnovers and Haywood made three three-pointers and scored 11 points in the second quarter as Franklin used a 12-0 run to turn a 13-9 deficit into a 21-13 lead.    But the Quake is ranked second in Class 4A because it boasts two of KingCo's best players, and both showed why they have received scholarship offers to Division I schools. Will Hendricks, a physical inside player who has signed at Arizona State, scored 10 first-half points. Anthony Lewis, an agile left-hander who has signed at Idaho, scored nine of his 22 points in the first half.     His dunk with three seconds left in the second quarter gave Franklin (1-0, 4-0) a 39-25 halftime advantage.     "They're a real athletic team and they put it to us," said Lake Washington guard Tyler Smithson, who scored 12 points. "We won the second half, but we dug ourselves too big of a ditch. Franklin is a team you have to play four quarters."      After falling behind 47-30, the Kangaroos closed the gap to six on several occasions, the last on a technical foul shot by Ryan Murphy with 1:27 remaining.  But a steal and layin by Haywood, who finished with 19 points, put the game out of reach on the ensuing possession.     The result was particularly tough on Jason King. The Kangaroos' senior guard spent his summer playing with Lewis and Hendricks on the super-successful "Friends of Hoop" select team. He earned his scholarship to Cal Poly-San Luis Obisbo over the summer by proving his outstanding shooting ability again and again.     While he led the Kangaroos with a game-high 26 points, he took far more shots than he wanted, and lost the bragging rights that were at stake with his Franklin friends in the process.     "We've been trash-talking all summer," King said. "Unfortunately, it didn't turn out the way I had hoped. But it's better to miss them now than at the end." Other games      At Juanita 62, Roosevelt 59 - Ryan Wildenborg, who had missed the front end of a one-and-one free-throw situation seconds earlier, dunked the ball to slam the door on the Roughriders and give the Rebels (1-0, 4-1) the victory.     Cory Ortiz led Juanita with 16 points, and Steve Towne and Wildenborg each scored 13. Darin Olsen scored 16 for Roosevelt and Chad Kodama added 14.     At Redmond 54, Inglemoor 43 - Brad Ditter hit six of nine field-goal attempts and finished with 20 points as the Mustangs broke open a close game late in the third quarter to win the KingCo 4A opener. The Mustangs (1-0, 5-0) led 38-34 late in the third quarter, but extended their lead to 42-34 by the end of the period after a 5-0 run sparked by Jeremy Treat's three-pointer.  Treat kept the hot hand in the fourth quarter, scoring eight of his 13 points in the final quarter. Ditter, who hit two three-pointers and Treat each were six for six from the free-throw line. Kevin Bynum scored 13 for the Vikings (0-1, 1-3).     Eastlake 46, at Bothell 38 - The Wolves (1-3, 1-0) led 23-10 at halftime and held on for the KingCo 4A win over Bothell despite a lackluster five-point third quarter.  Matt Gunther scored 14 and Dave Rothman 12 for Eastlake.     Pat Elvidge had 12 and Dan Sandrin 11 for the Cougars (3-1, 0-1).Caption:  PHOTOMARK HARRISON / SEATTLE TIMES: LAKE WASHINGTON SENIOR NICK WEST TRIES TO PASS FROM THE FLOOR WHILE FRANKLIN'S ANTHONY LEWIS REACHES FOR THE BALL DURING LAST NIGHT'S KINGCO 4A GAME.
