The U.S. Geological Survey has identified two new earthquake faults under Puget Sound capable of generating shaking of magnitude 6.5 to 7, or the equivalent to the major temblors of 1965 and 1949 that shook this region     The faults extend at least from the northern tip of Vashon Island to the southern tip of Whidbey Island and create two jogs or zigzags in the east-west-trending Seattle Fault that also runs under Puget Sound.     USGS geologist Samuel Johnson, who is based in Denver, will speak on the discovery at 7:30  tonight at the Northwest Geological Society meeting at University Plaza Hotel, 400 N.E. 45th St.     Johnson said scientists also have learned the Seattle Fault is building up a rate of slippage twice as fast as previously believed, or 0.8 to 1 millimeter a year instead of 0.5 millimeter.     That means the fault that runs under Seattle - which is thought to have caused a devastating earthquake here 1,100 years ago - may be more dangerous than earlier estimated. However, while the Seattle Fault has acquired enough tension for the rock on either side to slip about one meter - a serious quake - the tension is not yet nearly as serious as the seven meters of slippage that shook the area about 900 A.D., the geologist said.     In related research, to aid planners, University of Washington geologist Brian Atwater is trying to pin down the likely frequency of big, offshore subduction-zone earthquakes here. But Atwater  said last night he is still refining the statistical error in the imprecise historical record of the quakes, which appear to range from 300 to 1,000 years apart.     Johnson, who continues to analyze data he began gathering in 1995, found the two new Puget Sound faults by firing sound from an air gun from a 120-foot boat, the Robert Gray, to provide an echo picture of the top kilometer of rock under Puget Sound.     He said the Seattle Fault does not run under downtown Seattle or the Kingdome, as often depicted, but rather under Beacon Hill and the southern edge of Elliott Bay. Its course is complicated because it "splays" or "flowers" near the surface into several faults.     The fault continues west across Puget Sound from West Seattle, but jogs north twice when it is cut by the new north-south faults, hitting Bainbridge Island just south of Eagle Harbor.     Geologists have speculated the Seattle Fault may have been linked to a 5.0 earthquake centered on Vashon Island on Jan. 29, 1995, and that the Whidbey Island Fault that angles southeast across Everett may have been linked to a 5.3 earthquake near Duvall on May 2.     Scientists are unsure whether Sunday's 3.5 quake centered in Southeast Seattle is connected to any of these faults.     The Olympic Mountains are moving north relative to the Cascades, creating a series of north-south-trending faults, Johnson explained. He thinks the east-west Seattle Fault transfers stress from such faults at the edge of the Cascades south of Seattle to another series of faults under Hood Canal.Caption:  MAPSEATTLE TIMES: SEATTLE FAULT
