Starting next fall, they won't be the Franklin High School Quakers. They will be the Franklin Earthquake.     The change is designed to end the simmering question of whether a school should have a religious group as its nickname. The politically corrected nickname was selected by the Franklin students and staff members.     Earthquake was picked by about a 10-1 margin over Jaguars and Wildcats, principal Mark Enoch Robertson said.     "It's really a bold step, and I understand that some people want to maintain the name because it's been that way for so long," Robertson said. "But I think there also comes a time when there are bold decisions to be made and I think this is a good time to do it."      The principal said the new nickname is a good fit because:      --  The new name, especially when shortened to "Quake," sounds like "Quakers."      --  The new name adapts easily to school yells and the fight song.     --  Football uniforms, which are the only ones with the word Quakers on them, can be modified to "Quake." Since the possibility of a change began three years ago when then-Superintendent William Kendrick told schools to examine their nicknames, Franklin has avoided ordering uniforms that say "Quakers."      --  The new nickname has a Northwest influence.     --  The school now can have a mascot and logo. A student has drawn a cartoon earthquake character nicknamed "Rumble."  A logo of what Robertson describes as a "Pilgrim with a big blunderbuss" was dropped years ago because "it did not embody what the Quaker faith was all about," he said.     Presently, Franklin has no mascot.  Students told Robertson they wanted a mascot at games to boost spirit. He said he told them, "Maybe it's time to take a vote and change the whole name."      Robertson's research showed the old nickname never was voted upon but instead was bestowed on the school by the late Post-Intelligencer columnist Royal Brougham, probably in the 1930s.     The question of whether it was appropriate to have religious group as a nickname first arose in the '40s, he said.     Robertson said he hasn't heard much reaction from alumni to the week-old decision "because this was something we did in-house." Some students objected strongly to the change, and he realizes some alums will be unhappy.     "I've talked to a few alums and said, `You'll always be a Quaker.' But I think it's time to deal with this ongoing issue."      "We can still say we're the Quakers," Robertson said. "But we are the Earth-quakers. It kind of blends a number of things at the same time. It gives us that distance where the controversy hopefully can be diminished because we are no longer named after a religious group.
