If you've been sweating out the forecast earthquake predictor Jim Berkland offered us this past week, breathe easy.     Crawl out from under the table. Step out from under your doorway. Set the fine china back on the shelf.     It didn't happen.     Berkland, a California geologist who claims to have successfully called last month's earthquake near Bremerton, said a tremor of between 3.5 and 5.5 on the Richter scale, centered within 140 miles of Seattle, would strike by midnight  Saturday night.     But Mother Nature was as placid as Berkland's forecast was flaccid. Various seismology labs reported no significant quakes in the area over the past eight days, the period during which the geologist had predicted a quake would occur.     "It's not foolproof," said Berkland yesterday after his quake deadline had passed. "I'd rather have been wrong than have not predicted a stronger one and had it hit."       Berkland bases his predictions on the theory that quakes are most likely to occur during "seismic windows" - eight-day periods beginning with new or full moons and characterized by unusual gravitational forces. He also places credence in reports of bizarre animal behavior.     Berkland recently gained attention when he predicted the 4.9 quake that shook the Puget Sound area June 23.     This past week, minor tremors of between 2.1 and 3.0 magnitude struck near Mount Rainier, Kirkland and Walla Walla, but no earthquakes of the magnitude Berkland predicted took place in this area.      Berkland, who has generated a public following for his forecasts, but has drawn scorn from many in the scientific community, first made the prognostication in his monthly newsletter and repeated it last week.     Berkland said he was disappointed he'd been off the mark, but repeated his claim that he is right about 75 percent of the time, having made about 300 successful predictions in 400 chances since 1973.     Berkland was also quick to point out that his error was the public's gain, since no quake had meant no damage and no injuries.    "I don't cheer when I hit one, and I don't cry when I miss," he said.     The would-be seismic seer said his popularity has risen dramatically since his prediction of the Bremerton quake. Berkland said he received 500 letters after that tremor, most of them from this region, and virtually all of them supportive.     Of the 480 subscribers to his monthly newsletter, about 320 live in the Puget Sound area, he said.     Local seismologists, who have dismissed Berkland's predictions as vague and misleading, were not surprised the week passed without a major earthquake.     "He's just not very credible," said George Thomas, a seismologist in the University of Washington's geophysics department. "Earthquake prediction, for the most part, is bogus."      Thomas said it would not have been surprising if a quake had occurred, because the area is prone to aftershocks in the wake of the Bremerton quake.     If done responsibly, earthquake prediction could be of great benefit to the public, Thomas said. He noted that the UW is currently experimenting with methods of measuring seismic activity through motion sensors, and forecasting subsequent quakes from their readings.     Thomas emphasized that such a system was in the experimental stages, and might not be ready for years. If completed, it might provide some advance warning of quakes to the public, emergency-management teams and utility companies, he said.     But until such a system is designed, Thomas said, he expected quake forecasters like Berkland to prosper.     "He'll continue to do what he does," Thomas said. "A miss here and there isn't the sort of thing to keep him from doing it.
