A lot of people in Manassas, Va., thought a truck had rammed into a building yesterday.  Or that the roof had caved in. Or that a sonic boom had rolled by.    Turns out it was just an earthquake.    At 1:45 p.m. EDT, a quake registering 2.5 on the Richter scale jostled  Manassas, according to officials with the U.S. Geological Survey. Residents were stirred but not quite shaken: No injuries, collapsed buildings or broken dishes were reported.    In short, it was the day the earth almost stood still.    "It's what we would call a very minor seismic event," said John Minsch, a geophysicist with the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) in Golden, Colo. "If this happened in California, no one would probably even notice."     But in Northern Virginia, the term "earth-shaking" is not generally meant literally. So when the ground shuddered yesterday in Manassas, about 45 miles southwest of Washington, D.C., befuddled residents walked outside their homes and workplaces and flooded emergency dispatchers with telephone calls asking what had happened. Fire and rescue officials rushed around in a vain attempt to find an explosion to explain the event.    USGS officials found no Manassas entries in their earthquake database, which dates to 1970.     That is not to say that earthquakes are uncommon in Virginia and Maryland, geologically speaking. Just two months ago, for example, Culpeper, Va., about 30 miles from Manassas, was nudged by a slightly smaller quake than the one in Manassas.    Historically, there are two active areas in Virginia, said Martin Chapman, a research associate at Virginia Tech's Seismological Observatory in Blacksburg. One runs along the James River between Charlottesville and Richmond and is known as the Central Virginia Seismic Zone; the other is an area centered on Giles County in southwest Virginia - which had a 5.8-magnitude quake 100 years ago.    As for Northern Virginia, scattered earthquakes have shaken residents over the decades.    The most catastrophic earthquakes generally are caused by the collision of tectonic plates, but Virginia sits far from the edge of the North American plate.     Quakes in Virginia  are usually explained by ancient faults giving way. Scientists yesterday were at a loss to explain exactly what causes it.    "A small amount of stress must have built up in the Earth's crust," said John Filson, associate program coordinator at the U.S. Geological Survey Earthquake Center in Reston, Va. "To put it simply, something beneath Manassas cracked and broke.Caption:  MAPAP: MANASSAS (MAP NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY)
