A California-based scientist, who has gained a bit of renown - and some ridicule - for his attempts to predict cataclysms, says he forecast yesterday's earthquake in his newsletter as long ago as February     But for many scientists, Jim Berkland's seer status is as shaky as the terra not-so-firma he studies.     How often does earthquake prognosticator Berkland have to be right to convince people he can call the big and not-so-big ones?      A lot more than he has been lately, say his detractors.     "I get a lot of calls from people saying, `Congratulations! Another hit! I like what you're doing,' " said Berkland, who claims to have predicted six of the dozen most recent Seattle-area quakes of 3.5 magnitude or greater.     Yesterday's earthquake was the third in the Seattle area in the past three years that Berkland says he's forecasted.     In his June newsletter, he predicted a quake registering between 3.5 and 5.5 would hit Washington or Oregon, or both, between June 20 and 27.     In that same time period, he predicted a quake of 3.5 to 5.5 within 100 miles of San Jose, one of 3.5 to 5.5 within 140 miles of Los Angeles, and a major shaker of 7 or more "someplace on Earth, probably within the Pacific Ring of Fire."      The 66-year-old, now retired, says he predicted the 1995 and 1996 quakes that shook the Puget Sound region.     His first prediction, he says, was on Jan. 8, 1974, when he said a quake would hit Santa Clara County, south of San Francisco. Two days later, that area had a 4.4 quake.     Despite the latest apparent notch in his crystal ball, Berkland has failed to win over scientists who see him as too eager to fudge details and to conveniently forget his bad guesses.     "When he's wrong, we don't hear about that," said Bill Steele of the University of Washington geophysics department. "I don't find it useful."      Interest in Berkland's predictions among Pacific Northwest residents rose after he predicted the Jan. 28, 1995, quake on television and radio a week before it occurred.     Berkland makes his predictions based on his theory that earthquakes are most likely to occur during "seismic windows" - eight-day periods commencing with new or full moons and characterized by high tides and unusual gravitational forces.     But little scientific data supports his theory, scientists say. They add that where there has been a link between shifting tides and wobbly faults, Berkland exaggerates it.     "The windows for his predictions cover a very significant portion of the year," said UW research scientist Ruth Ludwin. "He's got a track record that's really pretty anecdotal."      Ludwin, who conducted a study in 1984 disputing Berkland's theories, said Berkland's eight-day period is so wide, and his criteria for predicting where a quake will occur is so broad - he typically allows for a 140-mile radius with any temblor - that it renders his forecasts meaningless.     Berkland's theories on occasion have cost him more than the respect of his peers.     He once was suspended as a geologist in Santa Clara County for making predictions on the job.     But his work has been convincing enough to attract 450 subscribers to his $40-a-year newsletter, 300 of whom live in the Puget Sound area, he said. His forecasts also are available  by telephone.     And for the record, he said there is a 75 percent chance of another earthquake of between 3.5 and 5.5 magnitude striking the Puget Sound area between July 19 and  26.
