ASSISI, Italy  - An earthquake shook central Italy today, sending people fleeing into the streets and inflicting new damage on areas hit by a pair of temblors a week ago, including the famed Basilica of St. Francis of Assisi    No injuries were immediately reported from the quake, which had a magnitude of 4.8.    There were reports of more damage to the interior of the basilica, according to Culture Minister Walter Veltroni.    The central regions of Umbria and Marche have trembled with aftershocks since the strong double quakes on Sept. 26.     The epicenter of today's quake was in Col Fiorito, a town heavily damaged last week. Col Fiorito is about 8 miles east of Assisi.    The ANSA news agency said the medieval bell tower in Nocera Umbra, badly damaged last week, collapsed in today's quake.    Part of the vaulted ceiling of the Basilica of St. Francis of Assisi collapsed a week ago, killing four people and destroying works attributed to Giotto and Cimabue. In all, 11 people died last week. USS Nimitz skips Singapore, hurries toward Persian Gulf    WASHINGTON - The aircraft carrier USS Nimitz has been ordered not to stop at Singapore and to get to the Persian Gulf ahead of schedule, officials said today.    The hurry-up apparently is linked to U.S. warnings to Iran earlier this week not to repeat its cross-border air attacks into southern Iraq.       Iranian rebels at bases in southern Iraq said they were attacked by Iranian planes on Monday.    The Nimitz, with a regular complement of fighter aircraft aboard, was scheduled to be on station in the Gulf later this month.     Also today, Turkey's semiofficial Anatolian news agency said Syria and Iran had deployed troops near a Kurdish enclave in northern Iraq in an apparent response to a Turkish military raid into Iraq. Turkish forces have been fighting Kurdistan Workers Party guerrillas in northern Iraq for almost two weeks. Turkey says the guerrillas aid Kurdish dissidents inside Turkey. Brazilian tribe suffering from tuberculosis epidemic      BRASILIA - Brazil's Guarani-Kaiowa Indian tribe is being devastated by an outbreak of tuberculosis and at least 27 have died in the past 15 months, the Catholic Church said yesterday.     The church's Indigenist Missionary Council said there were 196 cases of tuberculosis last year in the community of Dourados in the southern state of Mato Grosso do Sul. So far this year, 176 cases have been diagnosed.     Brazil's indigenous population numbered up to 5 million when the Portuguese first arrived in 1500. Now they total about 300,000 after being decimated by disease and war with the invaders. Britain frees Irish republican charged in 2 police murders      BELFAST - Britain today freed an Irish republican it had accused of two police murders that rocked the Northern Ireland peace process.     Colin Duffy, 29, had been charged with killing two patrolmen in June, a month before the Irish Republican Army declared a cease-fire in its war on British rule.     In a surprise move, a prosecution lawyer told a magistrate at Lisburn, south of Belfast, that the counts were being withdrawn because there was no reasonable prospect of securing a conviction against Duffy.     The murders incensed the British and Irish governments, the province's pro-British majority Protestants and most minority pro-Irish Roman Catholics.
