ADANA, Turkey - An earthquake hit this southern city yesterday, killing at least 108 people and injuring about 1,000, including several Americans at a military base, news reports and witnesses said.    Among those killed in the magnitude 6.2 quake were 37 people who lived in the slums of Adana, a city of 1 million, said Deputy Gov. Ardahan Totuk. At least 30 people were reported dead in the nearby town of Ceyhan, site of an oil terminal, the Anatolia news agency said.    Turkey's state radio said 107 people had been killed. Rescuers later pulled at least one more body from a collapsed building. The number of injured had reached about 1,000, said Gov. Oguz Koksal.    Interior Minister Murat Basesgioglu said only 12 of the injured were in critical condition.    The hardest hit areas were slums with poorly constructed buildings. The quake shattered windows and caused cracks in several buildings, as well as damaging some mosques.    "I thought I'd die," said Suna Cicel, 37, while watching rescue workers scour rubble piles with heavy machines early today in search of more victims. "I am very happy to be alive, I ran into the street in panic when the walls of my house began to crack."     Adana, where the quake was centered, is only 12 miles from Incirlik, which serves as a staging ground for about 45 U.S. and British jets that patrol a no-fly zone above the 36th parallel in northern Iraq. Some 1,400 personnel are part of the mission.    According to an announcement from the headquarters of the U.S. Air Forces in Europe, 25 people at Incirlik air base sustained minor injuries.    A U.S. Embassy spokesperson  told The Associated Press that a dozen U.S. citizens were lightly injured by falling objects.    The temblor knocked out power to most of Adana. It was not clear whether the oil pipeline linking Iraq to Turkey had suffered any damage.    Hundreds of people spent the night on blankets in public parks.    Private NTV television said thousands of people fled their homes in panic.     The U.S. Geological Survey said the quake had a preliminary magnitude of 6.2. It rattled the neighboring provinces of Mersin, Nigde and Kayseri, as well as the Mediterranean island of Cyprus, off Turkey's southern coast.    The Turkish Red Crescent, the Muslim equivalent of the Red Cross, was setting up tents. Hospital beds were placed in the streets and calls were made for blood donations.Caption:  PHOTO: MAP1) CAFER ESENDEMIR / THE AP: A MAN CARRIES AN INJURED BOY AFTER AN EARTHQUAKE SHOOK ADANA, TURKEY, YESTERDAY. MORE THAN 100 WERE REPORTED KILLED.2) KNIGHT-RIDDER NEWSPAPERS: EARTHQUAKE
