Anthony Lewis looked into Jason King's crying eyes and told himself he doesn't want to feel that way this season.     Then he told his Franklin teammates - who ended King's season with a dominating 72-41 victory over Lake Washington yesterday - they still have to win once more to qualify for next week's Class 4A boys state basketball tournament.     "We want to get to state. That's our second goal," said Lewis, who scored 10 of his 16 points in the second half of yesterday's loser-out game in the Wes-Sea-King bi-district tournament at Edmundson Pavilion. "At the beginning of the third quarter, I could see it in (King's) eyes that the game was over."      With its season on the line, the second-ranked Earthquake (20-5) did what it does best - defend.     The Franklin players knew if they stopped King, they probably would win. And junior Jimmie Haywood did just that, holding King, who scored 40 points in a playoff game last week, to two first-half points as Franklin built a 20-11 lead.     Haywood, a 6-foot-3 guard, also led the Earthquake with 26 points, including 20 in the second half as Franklin pulled away. On a team with two Division I players (Lewis is going to Idaho and Will Hendricks to Arizona State), Haywood has emerged as perhaps Franklin's best player.      At least that was King's assessment after the last game of his high-school career.     "He's going to be one of the top players in the state next year," said King, who finished with 13 points.      "He shoots. He rebounds. He defends. He was with me the whole game. I haven't been defended like that all season."      He probably hasn't faced anyone as motivated as Haywood, either. Haywood didn't watch any of the state tournament last season in person. He didn't want to, not after Franklin failed to qualify for the first time in seven years. All he did was watch the title game on television to remind himself where he wanted to be.     Nobody has been better this postseason. Haywood has scored 80 points in the past three playoff games. Now the Earthquake can qualify for state with a win tomorrow against Redmond (4:45 p.m. at Edmundson Pavilion).     "Every year Coach (Ron Drayton) goes to state," said Haywood, who had six steals. "We don't want to be out getting frustrated like we did last year."      Yesterday it was Lake Washington's turn to be frustrated and wonder what might have been. The Kangaroos (18-9) qualified for state last season and might be the best Class 4A team on the Eastside this season.     But they were the ones crying after the game.     "I'll miss hanging out with the guys, riding the bus, making fun of people," said Tyler Smithson, who scored 12 points. "But we played scared. You can't play that way and expect to win."      Redmond 50, Juanita 43 - Talk about a turnaround.     For three quarters, Juanita seemed sure to finally beat Redmond and avenge three earlier defeats to the Mustangs. Led by Steven Towne, who scored a game-high 17 points, the Rebels led 37-28 entering the final eight minutes.     But Redmond (17-9) outscored Juanita 15-0 to start the fourth quarter to eliminate the Rebels and advance to tomorrow's 4:45 p.m. game with Franklin that will determine the Wes-Sea-King's final state-tournament berth.     "I was thinking about all the basketball I've played and how it all might end today," said senior Marlon Jordan, who led the Mustangs with 16 points. "I was kind of worried because we beat them three times already, but I wasn't going to let us go this quickly. We wouldn't be denied."      Brad Ditter scored eight of his 14 points in the final period, when the Mustangs finally got into their spread-passing game. Redmond held Juanita (14-12) scoreless for the first 5:48 of the last quarter and led 43-37 before Juanita's Cory Ortiz, who scored 10 points, hit a three-pointer to make it 43-40.     The Rebels, who won the KingCo Conference Mountain Division title, had a chance to tie the game with 1:15 remaining, but Towne missed his open three-point attempt.  The Mustangs then made seven of eight free throws to advance.
