We know now a big, a very big, earthquake may one day hit the Puget Sound area.    But the announcement, from scientists and engineers meeting this week at the University of Washington, seemingly hasn't prompted much worry.   Consider the reaction of people yesterday at Seattle's Downtown Library.     "Honestly, they've been talking about earthquakes for so long, it doesn't mean much," said Sean Poland, 32, who hails from Kansas and who can remember storming into a basement in the middle of the night, half asleep, fearing a tornado.     You worry about tornadoes, he said. Still, he and his wife do have some food and water in storage, but that was prompted by a windstorm that knocked out power for two days.     Doris Johnson, who sat at the library's information desk, said she has an earthquake kit, but neither her bed nor her bookcases are bolted down, which is what another woman in her department has done.     Erin Balize, 16, of Seattle, leafed through a financial-aid guide to colleges, more worried about scholarships than seismic risks or thrust faults.   "I don't really pay much attention. There's not much I could do if it does happen," she said. She thought her mother had some water, food, blankets and first-aid kits stored in the basement.      Maybe it's a Northwest thing, this business of reading about the Big One or a monster tsunami but not doing much about it. Maybe there aren't as many earthquake-hardened Californians living up here as we think.     There's something of a denial stage, said Don Atwood, owner of Emergency Preparedness Service, a warehouse business in Georgetown.     "When we actually have an earthquake here, it usually takes two to three days before people get over the denial stage and say, `I guess I better do something,' " he said.     And then they come into Atwood's store to buy supplies.    The region's latest earthquake warning came Monday, when U.S. Geological Survey scientist Craig Weaver told colleagues that pressure from the Sierra Nevada block of the North American plate could lead to massive earthquakes in the Puget Sound area. The block acts like a battering ram, bashing into another section of the North American plate near Oregon's Klamath Mountains and causing a chain reaction farther north, Weaver said at the opening session of this week's Geotechnical Earthquake Engineering and Soil Dynamics conference at the University of Washington.    Despite such warnings, said Mike Carlisle, co-owner of J-Co Emergency Preparedness Supplies of Federal Way, it usually takes some sort of actual event - not just a news announcement - to prompt people into action.     Yesterday, at Emergency Survival Products in Redmond, not even a Save-Your-Fanny-Pack got sold.     "I think it's the Northwest mentality," said owner Dennis Ballen. "People are more interested in the nice weather, the golf tournament, Seafair - who needs to be worried about an earthquake?" Information from Seattle Times staff reporter Diedtra Henderson is included in this report.
