BEIJING -  Fresh snowfall today added to the misery of thousands of farmers left homeless by an earthquake in northern China. Medical workers tried to treat the injured, but medicine was in short supply.    The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies today appealed for $1.2 million to aid victims of Saturday's quake, which killed 50 people and left thousands homeless in freezing weather.     Donations of food and clothing poured into the devastated region near the Great Wall, where many people are sheltered in army tents.     Other victims of the quake took refuge in haystacks and huddled around open fires.     Officials said there was a scarcity of medicine for the 10,000 injured, about 1,200 of them seriously.     Temperatures in Zhangbei and Shangyi counties in the northern province of Hebei, where the quake measuring 6.2 on the Richter scale struck, fell to zero degrees Fahrenheit in the daytime as snow fell.     More than 100,000 mud and brick houses were damaged or destroyed by the earthquake. Israeli Cabinet lists demands for West Bank withdrawal     JERUSALEM - A week before a U.S.-Israeli summit, Israel's Cabinet today laid down a 12-page list of conditions it said the Palestinians must meet before Israel will fulfill its promise to pull back troops in the West Bank.   One condition is that the Palestinians disarm Islamic militants, who have carried out several suicide bombings in Israel since 1994. Israel also says the Palestinians have not lived up to their promise to annul sections in the PLO Covenant calling for Israel's destruction.     President Clinton reportedly expects Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu to present a detailed plan for a pullback when they meet in Washington on Jan. 20. Man lights himself afire to protest Vatican gay stance      ROME - A Sicilian man, opposed to the ban by Vatican authorities on relations between homosexuals, today set himself on fire in St. Peter's Square and attempted to rush toward the basilica's entrance, police said.     Alfredo Ormando, 39, from Palermo doused himself with gasoline and set himself alight as he stood near the Bernini colonnades around the square. He was in serious condition. Second mass suicide try by cult foiled in Spain      SANTA CRUZ DE TENERIFE, Spain - Spanish authorities said today police had detained 19 members of an alleged doomsday cult after they tried to commit mass suicide for the second time. The group was later freed.     The group was taken into custody overnight after a failed suicide attempt at a Tenerife farm owned by their suspected leader, a German psychologist who was arrested last Wednesday, a government spokeswoman in the Canary Islands said.     Police said last week they had foiled a mass suicide attempt by 32 followers of alleged cult leader Heide Fittkau-Garthe who believed a spaceship would rescue their souls from Tenerife's Teide volcano. U.S. servicemen's remains returned from Vietnam      HANOI, Vietnam - The remains of seven American servicemen were loaded onto a U.S. military transport plane in the Vietnamese capital today for a flight to Hawaii. Their identities have not yet been released.Caption:  PHOTOTHE AP: PLATFORM GETS A TUG FROM A TIGHT SPOT -- TUGBOATS TRY TO FREE THE DISCOVERY ENTERPRISE PETROLEUM PLATFORM, WHICH SMASHED INTO THE MAIN BRIDGE TODAY IN FERRIOL, SPAIN.
