AIQUILE, Bolivia - In an area of central Bolivia devastated by fatal earthquakes a day earlier, a tremor yesterday toppled damaged adobe homes and sent thousands of panicked mountain villagers rushing to open plazas and soccer fields for safety.    There were no fatalities in the quake, which had a preliminary magnitude of 4.5, according to the San Calixto Observatory. But Gen. Jose Antonio Gil said the death toll from Friday's quake had climbed to at least 84 after soldiers had found more bodies in the rubble.    Some 200 people were injured, and a fleet of small planes used an improvised landing strip to transport the wounded to hospitals. Most were taken to the city of Cochabamba, 150 miles to the northwest.    Friday's quake in this South American nation leveled homes, buried victims in debris and left thousands homeless. In Aiquile alone, more than 2,000 people camped next to the remnants of their destroyed homes or under sheets of plastic knitted together with wood retrieved from the debris.    Sitting on a bench in the main plaza of this town, her face covered by a bloodstained bandage, Albina Nova, 76, said she lost her home and virtually everything she owned.    "I have nowhere to go," she said, crying.    Defense Minister Fernando Kiefer said nearly half of the 1,193 houses inspected by officials had been destroyed and 33 percent will probably have to be demolished.    "Many people want to leave their towns, especially Aiquile and Totora," Kiefer said. "All those wanting to be evacuated will be evacuated."     The 5.9 quake at dawn Friday was followed in the next 12 hours by more than 100 aftershocks. More than 30,000 people, mostly Quechua Indian farmers, live in the region.    As international aid began to pour in, Kiefer said food supplies and medical care were adequate, but lack of electric power and water remained a problem.    Radio stations in several Bolivian cities, however, broadcast requests for donations of medical supplies, beds and wheelchairs.    The government, calling for a three-day nationwide mourning period and declaring the area a catastrophe, set up a $5.5 million emergency fund.    Private-aid organizations in the United States also were preparing shipments of food and medicines, the Bolivian government said. Five U.S. military advisers who were in Bolivia on a training mission also joined the rescue operations.Caption:  PHOTOANTONIO SUAREZ / THE AP: RESCUE WORKERS SEARCH FOR QUAKE SURVIVORS IN AIQUILE, 350 MILES SOUTHEAST OF THE BOLIVIAN CAPITAL, LA PAZ.
