MIAMI - It was 26 years ago that Nicaragua last saw a natural disaster that rivals or surpasses the devastation the country is enduring from the watery remnants of Hurricane Mitch.    The Managua earthquake of Dec. 23, 1972, claimed up to 10,000 lives, left 300,000 people homeless, forever changed the character of the capital and eventually cost the late Nicaraguan dictator Anastasio Somoza his job.    It's far too early to assess the long-term consequences of Mitch, but it's unlikely they will be as far-reaching as the 1972 earthquake.    Still, said Mark Schneider, deputy administrator for Latin America of the U.S. Agency for International Development, Nicaragua is "just beginning to make an economic recovery from a decade of conflict," and Mitch's visit "adds an enormous burden to the whole development problem."     Jorge Sapoznikow, Central America division chief for the Inter-American Development Bank, said a situation such as this "couldn't have happened at a worse time" in Nicaragua.    The country's economy had shown positive growth in recent years - a 5 percent rate in 1997 and a projected 6 percent for this year before Mitch came along.    The 1972 earthquake, Schneider noted, "destroyed the center of the entire city and forced a redesign of development in Nicaragua. An earthquake is much more localized in terms of immediate impact."     As a former U.S. Embassy economics officer in Nicaragua noted, the economy was just recovering from the "disastrous economic policies" of a decade of Sandinista rule. "The policy damage that the Sandinistas did was much more harmful than the 1972 earthquake."     The same official observed that those policies were made possible by Somoza's corruption of the earthquake-reconstruction effort, which undermined his government and led to the Sandinista takeover in 1979.    What Mitch's political impact will be on Nicaragua's democratically elected government remains to be seen.    Vincent Gawronski, visiting professor of political science at Florida International University in Miami, who is studying the political impact of natural disasters, notes that those events "can undermine an authoritarian regime" more easily than a democracy "because it's easier to know who's in charge and who to blame."     At the same time, Gawronski says, disasters and how they are dealt with "can easily become more of a political issue" in a democracy because of the opportunities they create that don't exist in an authoritarian regime.Caption:  PHOTOJOHN MOORE / AP: FLOOD SURVIVORS TRY TO PULL A HORSE OUT OF A MUD-COVERED SECTION OF THE PAN-AMERICAN HIGHWAY NEAR CHINANDEGA, NICARAGUA, YESTERDAY.
