With a kickoff workshop Saturday, Seattle will become one of two cities nationally to launch an ambitious new program to teach homeowners the newest ways to correctly retrofit their homes to withstand earthquakes.     Called Project Impact and funded by the federal government, it will walk homeowners through construction technicalities, provide them with speeded up building permits and sources for special home-retrofit loans, and distribute fresh information about whether their houses are located in particularly vulnerable locations.     After three decades of minimal quakes locally, why should anyone care?      Because the region's 7.1 earthquake of 1949, and 1965's shaker registering 6.5 on the Richter scale, each caused eight deaths and millions of dollars in damage. Scientists say even stronger quakes have happened in the past and almost certainly will occur in the future, the result of movement along faults that are only now being extensively mapped and analyzed.     And also because lessons learned in California validate the fact that not only can owners protect their homes structurally from quakes, but these protections pay off.     In the 1989 Loma Prieta quake, for instance, the average cost to repair a house within the quake area that hadn't been retrofitted to withstand earthquakes was $25,000-$35,000. (Damage varied according to condition of the soil and the house.) But those that had been retrofitted correctly - generally at a cost of $5,000 or less - suffered much less structural damage. The same thing was borne out in the 1994 Northridge quake.     "We don't want people to get frightened, but to realize we live in a region that has very real hazards," says Bill Steele, the University of Washington's seismology lab coordinator. "But there are ways people can lower the hazards by doing intelligent things like retrofitting their homes."      The bottom line, Steele says, is "we can deal with earthquakes (beforehand) rather than waiting until they occur and then trying to respond to them." Workshops answer questions      Steele will participate in Saturday's Project Impact seismic home retrofit program. It begins at 8:30 a.m. at North Seattle Alliance Church, 2150 N. 122nd St. He's one of several earthquake and landslide scientists who will explain the newest hazard-mapping efforts and answer questions.      The program also will feature workshops explaining how to assess a home for retrofitting, where to learn how to do it yourself, where to go for low-interest loans and grants and how the city's Department of Construction and Land Use permit process works.     The program is free and no advance registration is required.     Until recent years, Seattle's emergency management program was mostly focused on what to do after a disaster - not what to do beforehand, and certainly not on how the government and private corporations could work together to help the public undertake its own mitigation programs.     But that's exactly what's happening with Project Impact, and what makes it different, says Jim Mullen, director of Seattle's Office of Emergency Management. He was instrumental in getting the $1 million from FEMA, the Federal Emergency Management Agency that's underwriting Project Impact. (Oakland, Calif., is the other city undertaking a Project Impact quake program.)       Half is being spent to make Seattle Public Schools more quake resistant. The other $500,000 is going toward teaching homeowners within Seattle's city limits either how to retrofit their homes themselves or what they need to know to have pros do it for them.     According to Linda Noson, Project Impact coordinator, homeowners who do the work themselves can expect to spend $500-$1,000. Hiring a licensed contractor will run $2,000 to $5,000, depending on such factors as the size of the home.     Also taking part in Saturday's program is Gary Milici, owner of Retrofitters, a firm that braces houses to withstand earthquakes. Milici started his firm in 1989 in Los Angeles, and braced many homes there before and after the Northridge disaster.     When he moved his business to Seattle, "and saw what people were calling house bolting, I was really shocked," Milici says.     The problem: Homeowners were simply bolting their homes to the foundation, but that only protects in quakes where the earth moves upward. It doesn't protect during lateral quakes where the earth - and the homes upon it - are shaken from side to side.      "An incorrect or incomplete retrofit is as bad as having no retrofit at all," he says. Seismic safety steps      Thus Milici teaches both homeowners and licensed contractors the three steps necessary for adequate seismic home retrofitting:       --  First, the wood structure (typically the sill plate that rests on the concrete foundation) must be anchored by means of bolted connections to the foundation.     --  Second, the short wood stud walls (called pony or cripple walls) below the home's first floor must be strengthened with sheathing such as plywood. This sheathing, called sheer walls, is what protects homes against lateral movement.     --  Third, the pony walls need to be connected to the floor framing above and the sill plates below with nails and metal framing clips.     Milici says whether or not owners will be able to retrofit their homes themselves "depends on the homeowners. It sounds like a very simple process, and on paper it is. But there are lots of details that go into a correct retrofit, and it's those details that make the difference."      Those details "are learnable by homeowners, but they add a layer of time and technical skill that a lot of people don't recognize up front."       To help them learn these details, the city's Department of Construction and Land Use has deviated from its usual practices, says department spokesman Alan Justad. Usually DCLU's role is limited to informing owners about building codes, granting permits and doing inspections. Outside help may be needed      For Project Impact, the DCLU has developed a packet of information telling owners exactly how to retrofit most homes - including a grid on which to draw their own plans.      And it has spelled out what types of residences within Seattle qualify for a retrofit that's designed and done by the owner.      Among the requirements: Homes must be light, wood-frame construction with standard lightweight roofing (such as wood or composition shingles) and have a concrete or reinforced masonry foundation that's in good condition.      They also must have a crawl space or basement, be on a flat or moderate slope and be three stories or less. Residential structures up to four units qualify.     The DCLU stresses that homes that don't meet these guidelines still can be seismically retrofitted and owners can do the work themselves. However they will have to hire an engineer or architect to design the retrofit method.     And it stresses that not all homes need seismic upgrades. Those built after 1970 or built on slab foundations may be able to withstand a quake without significant structural damage.     Determining whether a home is a good candidate for a retrofit, including how much work needs to be done and whether repairs are necessary first, may be beyond the scope of many owners' expertise. That's why Project Impact will pay to have a licensed contractor do a home assessment to answer these questions, says Noson, the project's coordinator. That service is free to homeowners; a list of contractors is available from the Phinney Neighborhood Association.     Owners who choose to do their own work must attend a retrofit class, offered at several locations by the Phinney association, before they can get a building permit. According to Justad, the department's goal is to give owners those permits within 24 hours - providing their retrofit plan is acceptable.     To emergency management director Mullen and others, the import of Project Impact isn't just that 2,000 homes a year may get retrofitted - that number is the goal. Rather it's that the city is being proactive. Says Mullen: "Project Impact is the first thing I've seen that pulls everyone together and gets them working on common problems and with a beginning and end goal - to educate people and retrofit homes. This has got tremendous potential."       Taking part in Project Impact are more than a dozen different entities, including the U.S. Geological Survey, the University of Washington, the state's Department of Natural Resources, plus major insurance and engineering firms.      In addition, two local banks, Seafirst and Washington Mutual, have special loan programs for homeowners who participate in this program.     In the future Mullen hopes that what Seattle learns through Project Impact can be replicated in other nearby communities, making not just people but homes prepared to withstand the Big One. ------------------------------- How to reach Project Impact Want more information about Saturday's Seismic Home Retrofit workshop or Project Impact? Here's who to call:      City of Seattle Divison of Emergency Management      206-233-7123      For information about the workshop.      Seattle Department of Construction and Land Use      206-684-8850      For retrofit standards and building permits.      Phinney Neighborhood Association      206-382-2159      For homeowner retrofit classes, the list of approved contractors who will do the free home assessments, contractor training and volunteer assistance.      Washington Mutual Bank, any branch      or      Seafirst Bank 206-585-1808      For Project Impact seismic retrofit loans.      REACH      206-684-0244      For assistance for low- to moderate-income homeowners.Caption:  PHOTO: ILLUSTRATION1) COURTESY OF LINDA NOSON: CALIFORNIA'S 1989 LOMA PRIETA  EARTHQUAKE IN THE SAN FRANCISCO BAY AREA DAMAGED OLDER HOMES, SUCH AS  THIS ONE, THAT HADN'T BEEN CORRECTLY RETROFITTED TO WITHSTAND THE  QUAKE'S SIDEWAYS MOVEMENT.2) GANNETT NEWSPAPER / THE SEATTLE TIMES: HOW TO MAKE YOUR HOUSE QUAKE  SAFE (ILLUSTRATION NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY)
