Architectural engineer John Olav Tusvik Sr. lived simply but had a far from simple life.     He resisted the Nazi occupation of Norway in World War II. He saw the world with the Merchant Marine. He trained as an opera singer, worked as an engineer, then moved to Alaska to fish for cod and help rebuild Kodiak after the devastating 1964 earthquake. His relocation to Seattle brought stability.     "He was just a plain man," said his former wife,  Nordis Tusvik of Lake Forest Park, to whom he was married for 27 years. "But he had an interesting life."      Mr. Tusvik died last Thursday (Feb. 11) of heart failure. He was 72.     "He liked to see new places," said his daughter Sissel Brandon of Park Rapids, Minn. "When I was young and we were still in Norway, we were always going on trips all over Norway and up to Finland. When we were in Alaska, he would take us in little boats out to islands to have picnics."      Born in Tysse, Norway, Mr. Tusvik worked with his father in the underground Norwegian Resistance movement when he was a teen during World War II.     "He took food up to the Russian soldiers who had escaped into the mountains from concentration camps," said his former wife. "They also got guns and supplies."      A gifted tenor, he studied opera. He abandoned that as a career after learning it didn't pay enough. But he sang nonprofessionally on stages in Alaska, and later sang with Seattle's Norwegian Male Chorus.     After a stint in the Merchant Marine, he earned a degree in architectural engineering at Oslo Technical School. He soon found work as an engineer and building inspector.     At age 37, with a family to support, he took off for Alaska to work in fishing and carpentry. Within months the earthquake struck and he designed and helped build a library, medical clinic, cemetery and other facilities on Kodiak Island.     In 1968, he moved his family to Seattle, where he did carpentry and general contracting.     "A lot of times he liked to just draw architectural plans, even if not for a particular building," his daughter said. "He was an artist.     "He was very proud of his Norwegian heritage. But when we took a trip back to Norway and visited his sisters, he couldn't stop talking about how much better things were in America."      Also surviving are his son, John Tusvik Jr. of Bothell; daughter Sinove Tusvik, Kent; sisters Irene Eikrem, Bjorg Lysfjord and Gunvor Simonsen, all of Norway; and a grandchild. Services have been held. Remembrances may go to Alzheimer's Association, Western and Central Washington Chapter, 1422 N.W. 85th St., Seattle, WA 98117. Carole Beers' phone message number is 206-464-2391. Her e-mail address is: cbeers@seattletimes.com
