TAICHUNG, Taiwan - She is Taiwan's version of Mother Teresa: a woman ministering to the poor and hoping to educate the rich.    And now, even the government is looking to this Buddhist nun - who shaves her head, shrouds her tiny frame in a long gray robe and speaks in the softest of voices - to raise money for temporary housing for the thousands made homeless by last month's massive earthquake in Taiwan.    She is Master Cheng Yen, or simply "the Master," as she is known to the 25,000 volunteers ranging from homemakers to corporate chieftains who dedicate their time and money to Tzu Chi, the Buddhist charity corps she started in 1966.    Cheng was well-known in Taiwan before the earthquake. But now, she and her Tzu Chi volunteers have been elevated to the status of heroes, with many Taiwanese thinking they were far more efficient than the government in responding to the quake.    Nearly instantly after the Sept. 20 temblor struck, hundreds - perhaps thousands - of corps members were deployed to the hardest-hit areas, doling out water and face masks, treating the injured and stirring up fresh meals in industrial-sized woks. In many cases, Tzu Chi volunteers were on the scene long before the government - a fact that didn't go unnoticed by bitter, grieving victims.    While the government was hamstrung by the difficulties of coordinating rescue efforts, Tzu Chi volunteers were playing on their strengths: Because they live all over the country, they could assess their own neighborhoods' conditions and spring into action.    Arriving ready to work in their hallmark blue Tzu Chi jerseys and white pants, some volunteers brought food and water for the victims.    "Hot food is so important," said Walter W.C. Chen, a volunteer who is also chairman of Topkey, a manufacturer of   tennis rackets. "When you provide hot food, you just feel like you're at home."     Also key, he said, was that each volunteer handed the food out "with love," providing a human touch. That personal touch is a core value for the charity: Everything must be handed out personally to victims, not just stacked in a corner or sent overseas.    The gesture was noticed by those who suffered. "Tzu Chi was very kind and mentally supportive - that's different from the rescue teams," said victim Chou Cheng-sun, who, with hundreds of others of families with damaged homes, has been camping out under a plastic tarpaulin in a temporary, outdoor government shelter.    The need for housing is severe. Soon after the quake, Cheng was busy meeting with various national, county and city officials who were offering to donate land for the emergency housing. The local government officials had identified seven possible sites but didn't know how long it would take to get a budget to build them.    So they turned to the 62-year-old Cheng, who they were confident could raise the $30 million required to build 5,000 units - and see that the houses are finished within two months.    Cheng's plan for raising the money? To encourage corporations and individuals to donate enough to buy one, 10 or even 100 units.    It shouldn't be too hard for her. About 20 percent of the island's citizens contribute monthly to Tzu Chi, which last year raised $300 million.    In her books, including one called "Still Thoughts" that describes her gentle ways and Buddhist teachings, Cheng imparts advice such as: "One should be swift in doing good deeds and one's meritorious deeds should be continuous. It is like boiling a pot of water: Before the water reaches the boiling point, do not put the fire out, for it would be too much trouble to start all over again."      The nuns, including Cheng, who run the charity, earn their living expenses by selling candles and bean paste among other items. Prospective members must spend one day a month for two years in training to become volunteers - reading the Master's books - and promising to lead a "clean life" free of alcohol, drugs or affairs.    Last year's contributions were used for hospitals, education and social services in Taiwan and abroad. The volunteers donate money and time to care for the sick and the poor, including the many poor elderly men, many of whom were Chinese soldiers. More money has been spent abroad, with volunteers traveling to Africa, Vietnam and the Philippines, among other places.    Born Wang Chin-Yun, she became a nun at 23, shortly after her father died of a brain hemorrhage. In 1966, she was motivated to start the charity after seeing a pool of blood in a hospital left by a poor woman who had had a miscarriage. The woman had been turned away because she couldn't come up with a $200 deposit.    Soon after, Cheng asked a group of 30 homemakers who were followers to save 50 cents a day from their daily grocery money.    Word spread, and soon Tzu Chi members were regularly visiting and assisting the poor and the sick. In 1986, Tzu Chi opened its first hospital, which was geared to treating anyone, regardless of ability to pay.    "Tzu Chi just asks people to help, to take action," the volunteer Chen said. "The Master's words are so simple, but they are from the Buddha. Just help people and you'll become clean, and less troubled and less worried. It's been proven with me."
