TOKYO - This is a city that expects, any day now, to see 7,000 people die, nearly 4 million made homeless and a half-million buildings collapse or burn.    Tokyo's residents expect the Big Quake - a magnitude-7 temblor that will devastate the city, much like the one in 1923. And they expect it soon.    "Oh, yes, I think there will be a big earthquake shortly. I'm very worried about it," said Misa Kurosawa, escorting her 9-year-old daughter through an earthquake-preparedness course.    The shudder of large earthquakes through Turkey and Taiwan, and smaller temblors in Greece and California in the past three months, have pricked the nerves of this city's residents. With so much movement in the geological plates, the Japanese figure it won't be long before their world starts shaking. A recent government study came up with somber casualty estimates.    "Japan will not be beaten here," Haruo Otsuka, a guide at one of three Tokyo Fire Department earthquake-instruction centers, said wryly. "We will be No. 1 in earthquakes, too."     His audience of mothers, daughters and visiting municipal officials peered through 3-D glasses at a graphic movie of what could happen to Tokyo in a major quake. The visitors ducked and flinched as concrete blocks and shards of glass seemed to fly toward them. Sparking utility poles crashed downward; cars careened across the screen.    Later, the visitors stood in a simulator, decorated as a kitchen, as the floor bucked and heaved as it would during a quake with a magnitude of 6, the level at which it becomes difficult to stand. They were invited to try to turn off a burner on the stove.    "It was scary," fourth-grader Kana Kurosawa said. What did she learn at the center? "I learned that I may die," she said.    Earthquakes are serious business here. Schoolchildren routinely practice drills in which they tie cushions on their heads (to protect them from small falling objects, said one official), duck under desks and evacuate to parks.    Tokyo has an aggressive disaster-preparedness program. A control center with huge electronic displays has been set up to tally the casualties and damage in each ward after any earthquake, and a two-story video screen is supposed to display live images from helicopter-mounted cameras. City officials are acutely aware that the public believes authorities reacted dismally to the 7.2-magnitude earthquake that killed 6,000 people in Kobe in 1995.    But all the drills cannot change the fact that Tokyo is intensely vulnerable.    "In terms of emergency and medical-service preparedness, I would give Tokyo a grade of 80 out of 100," said Osamu Koide, a professor of urban engineering at the University of Tokyo and a leading expert in the field. "In terms of the structure of the city, I would say it is almost untouched, totally unprepared."     The first earthquake standards for new construction were instituted in 1974 and strengthened in 1981. Officials say those later standards are tough enough, and Japan pioneered construction techniques such as putting buildings on rollers and installing long counterweights to offset shaking.    "What was proven in Kobe was that the buildings built after 1981 basically had no damage," Koide said.    But 2 million of Tokyo's 2.6 million structures, including many mid-rise concrete apartments, were erected earlier, mostly in a mad rush to rebuild the bomb-ravaged city when rural residents streamed in after World War II.    Kobe left the nation with searing images of collapsed buildings and overturned freeways. Tokyo, too, has many elevated freeways rising above congested housing. The national and local governments are busily strengthening public buildings and the supports of highway overpasses. About 90 percent of the critical highway pillars in Tokyo have been bolstered with steel and concrete, according to Hisashi Hashimoto of the city's highway agency. But work is only now starting to strengthen the joints onroadbeds to keep whole sections from dropping.    But city planners say most victims of a major Tokyo earthquake would not be crushed; they would burn to death. The thousands of frame houses built in the first few decades after the war are fire traps. The metropolitan government last year identified areas with large concentrations of wooden structures and is making plans to move people into new high-rise apartments and configure neighborhoods to provide broad avenues and open spaces as fire lines.
