ISTANBUL, Turkey - Rescue workers worked frantically to pull survivors from the rubble today even as the death toll from western Turkey's worst recorded earthquake neared 7,000.    A Marietta, Ga., man and four of his young grandchildren were among those killed. Two other family members were injured.    They are the only American casualties known so far.    The dead were identified by family members as Nizam Kilic and his son's children: Jeffrey Michael, 6; Jennifer Kayla, 5; David Tansan, 2; and Katherine "Katie" Michelle, 9 months.    The father, Babur Kilic, a Marietta anesthesiologist, had planned to join his wife, their five children and his parents this weekend in Turkey for a vacation. Instead, he left for Istanbul yesterday to make funeral arrangements.    Kilic's wife, Jan, and 6-year-old daughter, Natalie, survived the quake. Kilic's mother is in critical condition, and Jan Kilic is in an Istanbul hospital, although the family has not yet learned her condition. Natalie was not injured.   Two million people in the city of Bursa were ordered to abandon their homes for fear of another earthquake.     Meanwhile, firefighters today tamed a blaze sparked by the earthquake at Turkey's largest oil refinery at Tupras, the Turkish government said.     American, French, Israeli and Austrian rescue teams joined Turkish crews and civilians in a massive effort to save the thousands of people trapped beneath the wreckage.    At least 6,866 people were killed and 33,022 injured, the government announced today.    The quake was the deadliest in Turkey since one in 1939 killed nearly 33,000.    The confirmed death toll grew by the hour as layer upon layer of flattened homes yielded new corpses, which overflowed hospital morgues and were laid in mosques, ice skating rinks and refrigerated meat trucks.    "About 99 percent of people rescued are rescued within the first 48 hours, and thereafter it is difficult to find people who have survived," said Helge Kvam, a spokesman for the International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies in Geneva. Most of those trapped in the wreckage may have  died of thirst.       More than 70 search-and-rescue experts from Fairfax, Va., and Miami are stationed in the southeastern quadrant of Izmit, the epicenter of the quake.    Ismail Baris, the mayor of Golcuk, estimated as many as 10,000 were still trapped under collapsed rubble in his navy-base town alone, more than 48 hours after the quake.    No point in Turkey seemed to symbolize the death and destruction wrought by the tremor more dramatically than Golcuk.  It is a city physically and emotionally devastated.    Men and women weep at street corners, helpless at the prospect of mountains of rubble that entomb their loved ones.    Israeli army rescue teams battled to dig Turkish soldiers from the collapsed barracks of the navy base in Golcuk.    Rescue workers at the navy base, dominated by a crane towering over the rubble, and in the town wore masks or handkerchiefs over their faces against the stench of unseen bodies in the sweltering heat of the disaster zone.     The quiet efficiency of the operation at the base contrasted with the chaos beyond the perimeter fences, in Golcuk. There, much of the rescue operation was in the hands of local people using sledgehammers and picks.    Dwindling food supplies on top of crippled power and water lines in some areas added to the mood of desperation.Caption:  PHOTOAP: PEOPLE SLEEP IN TAKSIM SQUARE IN ISTANBUL LAST NIGHT AFTER THE DEVASTATING EARTHQUAKE THAT STRUCK TUESDAY. MANY WERE AFRAID TO RETURN TO THEIR HOMES - AND MANY HAD NO HOMES TO WHICH THEY COULD RETURN. (PHOTO RAN IN EARLY EDITION)
