ADAPAZARI, Turkey - It was moving day for Mahide Baksi, and she was a bundle of nervous energy, lining up bulging plastic bags, boxes and her caged blue parakeet. Finally, she could look forward to a home of her own - a white tent in a giant camp springing up at the edge of this earthquake-devastated city.    "I'm so happy," she said yesterday, grabbing a pair of her daughter's shoes wrapped in newspaper. "We'll have a house - sort of."     Baksi's enthusiasm was understandable, considering what she had been calling home: a white plastic lawn chair set on a grassy downtown strip. She, her husband and two daughters had lived in the open since last Tuesday's earthquake, the country's worst-recorded natural disaster.    As the search for survivors winds down, Turkey is turning its attention to a nightmare of caring  for the hundreds of thousands of newly homeless, like Baksi and her family.    Tent cities are being created along a 175-mile belt of earthquake-damaged terrain stretching from Istanbul east. Turkish authorities said yesterday that 26,000 tents had been sent to the quake zone, and four ferries were being dispatched to locations along the Marmara Sea to house the homeless. But such shelter is woefully inadequate. And it is unclear what will happen to the tent dwellers when the weather turns cold and rainy this fall.    Adapazari, about 80 miles east of Istanbul, offers a snapshot of the staggering task authorities face. Here, 70 percent of the housing was damaged by the quake. Nearly three-quarters of the 350,000 residents of the city and its outlying villages will have to find new homes, local officials say.    "The problem today is first and foremost housing and sanitary conditions," said Idris Kurtkaya, a deputy governor of the local province.    Preparations were under way yesterday at the huge tent city near Adapazari to receive the homeless. The Red Crescent, Turkey's version of the Red Cross, had set up 650 conical tents, turning an empty field into a sea of white tepees.    An additional 2,350 tents were to be pitched today, said the camp's director, Safak Izgi.     Izgi said similar camps were going up in two other earthquake-damaged cities, Golcuk and Izmit.    "Our country may not be rich in money, but we are in heart," said Izgi, pointing to donated mattresses, blankets and tents.    With hot showers, clean drinking water and cooked meals, the camp offers a vast improvement over conditions for many of the homeless in Adapazari. But no one knew how long the people will be forced to live in tents.    Izgi said he hopes the camp will be empty by November. But Kurtkaya acknowledged that it could be a year or more before new housing is ready. The entire city might have to be rebuilt elsewhere, he said.     The establishment of the tent cities comes with the falling of the first rains since the 7.4 magnitude quake.  The precipitation is a mixed blessing,  washing away dirt and dust that could carry disease but also bringing contaminated runoff from decomposing corpses into the streets.    As the rescue efforts wind down,  some foreign rescue teams are preparing to leave.    "Chances of survivors are diminishing hour by hour," said Joseph Uttrect, a Swiss rescue worker who was pulling out today.    The official casualty count crept higher today to 12,134 dead and 33,384 injured. Some politicians and relief leaders have estimated as many as 40,000 people may have perished and believe thousands of bodies are still entombed by rubble.    There were signs Turkey was preparing for the worst. The government asked the United Nations to help find 45,000 body bags, said Sergio Piazzi, head of the European desk at the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs in Geneva.    The rain complicated efforts to clear the debris and continue looking for anyone who defied the odds and survived more than six days in the ruins. Rain makes the wreckage heavier and increases the risk it could topple onto rescuers.    Health officials also feared the rain, which is forecast to continue for several days, would bring down toxins pumped into the sky by a huge fire that burned for days at Turkey's biggest oil refinery. Health Minister Osman Durmus urged people to evacuate the area near the refinery in Izmit, 90 miles southeast of Istanbul.    Meanwhile, scientists report that Turkey actually was struck by two consecutive quakes.    Prof. Aykut Barka of Istanbul Technical University said the tremors were 20 seconds apart, lasting a total of  about 45 seconds.    Bruce Presgrave, a geophysicist with the U.S Geological Survey National Earthquake Information Center in Golden, Colo., said it is common for large quakes to occur in multiple surges in rapid succession.    "Almost every earthquake bigger than a 6-point magnitude is a multiple event," he said. "It's almost impossible to break a chunk of rock that long in one instance."Caption:  PHOTODIMITRI MESSINIS / AP: WEARING A MASK TO BLOCK DISEASES, A WOMAN WALKS PAST TENTS HOUSING QUAKE VICTIMS IN YALOVA, TURKEY, YESTERDAY. (PHOTO RAN IN EARLY EDITION)
