PEREIRA, Colombia - Mauricio Vargas, 9, pounded a rag doll with a piece of jagged brick.    His teeth gritted in concentration, he piled more pieces of brick around the doll's soft body until it was covered in rubble. Then he sat back to survey his work - and cried.    Tears poured from his eyes, and his story began to tumble out.    Last week, his house collapsed before his eyes. He watched as his grandparents were killed and listened to the cries of his mother and father, trapped beneath the rubble for hours before rescuers reached them.    "He cannot cope with what he saw," said Susana Sanchez, director of a UNICEF program to help children traumatized by the Jan. 25 earthquake that devastated Colombia's western coffee-growing region.    "He swings from rage to grief. There are hundreds of children like him here, and they need help."     Nearly 1,000 people were killed in the magnitude-6 earthquake. Entire neighborhoods were razed, and 200,000 people were left homeless.    As stricken cities such as Pereira begin to clean up, psychologists are trying to mend the minds of children traumatized by the horror.    "At least 90 percent of the children I've seen in affected areas suffer from post-traumatic stress syndrome," said psychologist Nidia Quiroz, emergency coordinator of UNICEF in Colombia.    The traumatized children typically have trouble sleeping, wet their beds and cling to their mothers - if their mothers survived, Quiroz said.    "Many of the children thought a monster had attacked their home and are afraid it will come back," she said.    Using hand puppets, dolls and wooden models of ambulances and helicopters, trained volunteers help the children act out what they experienced as a form of catharsis.    Yesterday, one group sat in a circle amid rubble on a Pereira street. Passers-by stopped to watch.    As an extra means of therapy, UNICEF has brought in 30 teenagers from Colombia's violence-prone Uraba region - a major battleground in a decades-long war between leftist rebels and the state - to share their experiences with Pereira's children.    Trauma survivors themselves and trained to counsel others, some of the teens were sent to Central America after Hurricane Mitch.    "We find they really can help young victims because children open up more to people they can relate to," Quiroz said.    Expressing what they suffered, even if it is through art or puppets, helps children who have lived through horrors to adjust to new realities, she said.    Mona Moreno, 5, placed a female doll she said was her sister in the arms of another doll she said was a firefighter, and had the firefighter doll carry her away.    Mona said some neighborhood children like to shake her chair and scream "Run!" to make her cry.    Daniela Cardona, 4, lay under a blanket on a thin mattress on the concrete floor of a refugee shelter. She will speak only to her mother and refuses to leave the mattress.    "Daniela hasn't smiled, laughed or expressed any feeling since the quake," Red Cross volunteer Alexandro Nieto said.    For many children like Daniela, the loss of the home is as meaningful as the trauma of the quake and the loss of family members, said Nieto.    Thousands of children are living under plastic lean-tos on the streets in front of their former houses.    "You see children sleeping on the sidewalk clutching a teddy bear," he said. "That teddy bear may be their link to their former home life."Caption:  PHOTOJAIME PUEBLA / AP: JORGE CERCEDA, 13, A VOLUNTEER FROM VIOLENCE-TORN NORTHERN COLOMBIA, COMFORTS MAURICIO VARGAS, 9, WHO LOST TWO GRANDPARENTS IN THE QUAKE.
