KAYNASLI, Turkey - Earthmovers pushed huge blocks of concrete from the remains of an apartment building yesterday as Turks frantically searched for survivors of a new earthquake that left at least 362 dead and 1,800 injured.    A pregnant woman and two men were pulled from the rubble alive. But with hundreds of people still unaccounted for, there were fears the death toll could rise sharply.    The magnitude-7.2 temblor flattened hundreds of buildings and reduced cars to piles of wreckage. In Duzce, a farming town at the epicenter, the quake tore out the center of a turn-of-the-century mosque, leaving only the walls standing.    Turkey's government, severely criticized for its slow response to the Aug. 17 quake that left more than 17,000 people dead, emphasized that it was rushing aid to the recently stricken area.    "There is a minister in each town that has been hit, a rescue team on each site," said President Suleyman Demirel, who visited the area yesterday.      Turkish Transport Minister Enis Oksuz told state television the cost of Friday's quake on Turkey's fragile economy could reach $10 billion - on top of an estimated $12 billion from the Aug. 17 quake.    "The destruction is severe," Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit said. "I hope that the wounds will be healed. . . . We are faced with a disaster."     The quake struck as Turkey prepared to host world leaders for a summit of the Organization for Security and Cooperation in Europe. The temblor rocked buildings in Istanbul, 90 miles to the west, where the world leaders are to convene, but Ecevit said the summit would not be canceled.    President Clinton was expected to arrive in Turkey tonight. First lady Hillary Rodham Clinton and her daughter, Chelsea, arrived in Ankara yesterday.    "Our hearts go out to the families of the victims," Hillary Rodham Clinton said in a statement. "As President Clinton has said, America stands ready to help in any way we can."     A government crisis center put the death toll at 362, the Anatolia news agency reported. Health Ministry Undersecretary Haluk Tokucoglu said nearly 1,800 people were injured.    International rescue teams rushed to Turkey from Greece, the United States, France, Germany and Italy. A U.S. team from Fairfax, Va., was expected to arrive before dawn today.    Zekeriya Percin silently watched as rescuers tried to reach the charred bodies of his 73-year-old father, Celal, and 19 other men.    "An aftershock knocked over the stove, and a fire engulfed the whole coffee house," he said.    Kaynasli, a wheat-growing town of 7,000 people, was one of the hardest hit in the region.    Fatma Demirci said four relatives were killed when her house collapsed.    "Kaynasli was set back 100 years," she said gazing at collapsed buildings and a shattered mosque.    The quake struck Bolu province, an area 45 miles east of the region worst hit by the Aug. 17 quake. That quake, which had a magnitude of 7.4, was centered on the more-populated coastal areas of western Turkey and not mountainous areas such as Bolu.    But the area hit Friday already was struggling to recover from the earlier quake. Tens of thousands of people who lost their homes still live in tents.    Much of Duzce is in ruins. Outside the city's damaged hospital, evacuated as a safety precaution, surgeons operated on injured victims in the open air.    Electricity was cut to most buildings in the stricken area to reduce the risk of sparks that could ignite leaking gas.    As evening temperatures fell to 37 degrees, survivors wandered the streets, huddled in a park around fires of wood and old tires or simply packed up and hitchhiked out of town.   Six army battalions and 50 members of an anti-terrorist police squad joined in the rescue efforts, while three military helicopters ferried badly wounded patients to hospitals in Ankara. Government ambulances stood outside most collapsed buildings, along with backhoes and mobile generators.Caption:  PHOTO1) DIMITRI MESSINIS / THE ASSOCIATED PRESS: AN EXHAUSTED WOMAN  SLEEPS IN FRONT OF A COLLAPSED BUILDING YESTERDAY AS RESCUERS LOOK FOR  SURVIVORS OF FRIDAY'S EARTHQUAKE IN NORTHWESTERN TURKEY.2) BURHAN OZBILICI / THE ASSOCIATED PRESS: TURKS PRAY DURING A FUNERAL  FOR MERVE AYYILDIZ, 8, A VICTIM OF FRIDAY'S EARTHQUAKE, AT A CEMETERY  IN KAYNASLI YESTERDAY.3) BURHAN OZBILICI / THE ASSOCIATED PRESS: AN EARTHQUAKE SURVIVOR  WATCHES A DOCTOR BEFORE SHE IS TREATED AT A STATE HOSPITAL IN KAYNASLI  YESTERDAY.
