BREMERTON - Some might call it tempting fate, but a team of scientists is planning to detonate explosive charges underground to get a better understanding of earthquake danger in the Puget Sound region.    The tests this week, to be conducted by some 80 geologists and seismologists from the U.S. Geological Survey and three universities, involve discharging underground explosives along a 60-mile line from the Cascade Range foothills, through Bellevue and across Bainbridge Island and Hood Canal.    The explosions are not expected to be felt by anyone except those standing near the test sites.    While the charges are exploding, 1,000 earthquake recorders along the route will measure seismic waves to help give researchers a picture of underground geologic formations - a sort of earthquake ultrasound.    "We've had to beg, borrow and steal every recorder we can find in North America," said Thomas Brocher, USGS head on the project, called dry SHIPS, an acronym for Seismic Hazards Investigation in Puget Sound. It is headquartered at the Kitsap County Fairgrounds.    The study complements "wet" SHIPS studies conducted last year aboard research vessels traveling through Puget Sound. Targeted are two potentially hazardous geologic formations: the Seattle fault, an active seismic zone that runs across the southern end of Bainbridge Island, and the Seattle basin, a region of softer sedimentary rocks layered over bedrock.    The Seattle basin, about 5.5 miles deep, extends beneath downtown Seattle. It is considered dangerous because of its soft sediments. In an earthquake, the ground in the basin could resemble water sloshing in a bathtub, said Craig Weaver, coordinator of the USGS Northwest Earthquake Program.    A better understanding of the basin's structure could help engineers design safer buildings, he said.    The 1,000 seismic recorders will be spaced about 110 yards apart. Charges, placed 100 to 200 feet down and spaced two to three miles apart, will be detonated early in the morning on three consecutive days next week. Data will be gathered and shared among researchers, who will use computers to create three-dimensional geologic pictures.    The project is a cooperative effort of USGS, the University of Washington, Oregon State University, University of Texas at El Paso and the Geological Survey of Canada.
