MANILA - An earthquake with a preliminary magnitude of 6.8 hit the northern Philippines, rocking much of the main island of Luzon early today and seriously injuring several people.     In Manila, buildings swayed dramatically, knocking objects off tables and shelves. Power was out in parts of the city and surrounding areas. Patients were evacuated from at least one hospital to the parking lot.     Rescue teams were placed on alert, but only minor injuries and damage were reported.     Bruce Presgrave, a geophysicist at the U.S. Geological Survey National Earthquake Information Center in Golden, Colo., said the earthquake measured 6.8 in magnitude and was centered near the west coast of Luzon island, about 110 miles northwest of Manila.     The 26-second quake struck at 2:04 a.m., the Philippine Institute of Volcanology and Seismology said.     In Manila, a crane toppled off the seventh floor of a building under construction, Mayor Lito Atienza said. Its operator was slightly injured as he tried to escape before it fell.     It was the second time in two days that Manila was hit by a power failure. On Friday night most of Luzon, which includes the capital, was without electricity for several hours after circuit breakers tripped at three power stations. Power companies blamed the failure on a large number of jellyfish that were sucked into a plant's seawater cooling system.     Nearly 2,000 people were killed when a magnitude 7.7 earthquake rocked the northern Philippines on  July 16, 1990. Zimbabwe police, protesters clash in democracy drive     HARARE, Zimbabwe - Zimbabwean police yesterday fired tear gas grenades and charged at 700 demonstrators who marched to demand democratic reforms.     Lawyers, academics and other opponents of President Robert Mugabe's regime scattered in terror as paramilitary riot squads attacked them in Harare's Mbare suburb. Later, the demonstrators regrouped and led police on a chase through Harare's downtown.     Police had forbidden the protest earlier in the week. A high court judge overrode the ban late Friday, but police cracked down on the demonstrators anyway.     The conflict within the government reflected an ongoing struggle between a judiciary striving to maintain its independence and a heavy-handed government. Confiscated device explodes, killing Kosovo peacekeeper     PRISTINA, Yugoslavia - A device that  NATO peacekeepers confiscated from former Kosovo Albanian rebels exploded yesterday, killing a Polish army officer and wounding four others, Polish officials said.     Capt. Pat Sweeney, a spokesman for the American command in the peacekeeping force, confirmed the explosion, saying it occurred at the town of Djeneral Jankovic along the border with Macedonia. He would not provide additional details.     Defense Ministry spokesman Eugeniusz Mleczak told PAP that three of the wounded were treated at a Polish military clinic and the fourth was transported to an American military clinic. None of their injuries was life-threatening, he said. Aborted landing killed three servicemen, Embassy says     KUWAIT - Three U.S. servicemen who died in a plane accident in Kuwait were killed in an aborted landing at an air base, the U.S. Embassy said yesterday.     After the aborted landing early Friday, the C-130 transport plane flew to Kuwait International Airport where it made an emergency belly-landing. Initial reports had said that was where the deaths occurred.     The three servicemen died from injuries received when their plane was "damaged attempting to land at an air base," an embassy statement said. It did not elaborate.     The plane was carrying 86 military personnel and a crew of eight, the embassy said. Seventeen servicemen were injured in the first landing attempt. The embassy said they have all been discharged from the hospital, but two were flown to Ramstein Air Base in Germany for "medical evaluation." China reports 38 on trial in piracy, mass-slaying case     BEIJING - In its biggest high-seas piracy case in years, China is trying 38 people for crimes including the slayings of 23 seamen who were killed and dumped overboard, state media said yesterday.     Prosecutors allege that the 38 defendants, who went on trial Friday, were members of a gang that posed as anti-smuggling police to hijack three ships in 1998.     Prosecutors say the pirates handcuffed, tied up and gagged the ship's 23 crew members, the reports said. The gang allegedly then bludgeoned the crew members to death and tied heavy weights to their bodies before dumping them into the sea, the state-run Beijing Morning Post said. Citing Israel link, Lebanon blocks import of Intel     BEIRUT, Lebanon - Airport customs officials have blocked imports of computers from U.S.-based Intel because of a law that bans dealings with companies with links to Israel, local newspapers reported yesterday.     As-Safir newspaper said that although Intel products have been entering Lebanon for more than 30 years, customs officials discovered only three days ago that the company was on the blacklist for doing business with Israel. Russia prime minister, Uzbek president sign military accord     MOSCOW - Russian Prime Minister Vladimir Putin and Uzbek President Islam Karimov signed an accord on military technical cooperation today, Russian news agencies reported.     "We are coming to a qualitatively new level of relations in security matters," Putin said during a one-day visit to Uzbekistan.     "We are ready by joint efforts to put a barrier to the spread of terrorism and extremism," he said, according to the ITAR-Tass news agency.     Putin and Karimov also worked on preparations for a meeting between the Uzbek leader and Russian President Boris Yeltsin in Moscow next year, the Interfax news agency said. Bangladesh ferry sinks; 25 killed, 100 still missing     DHAKA, Bangladesh - A ferry packed with more than 300 people sank in southern Bangladesh yesterday, killing at least 25 people and leaving as many as 100 missing, officials said.     The double-decker ferry Falguni went down in the Meghna River near the island town of Bhola, 65 miles south of the capital, Dhaka. The boat was carrying double its capacity.     Local fishermen rescued about 150 passengers who jumped overboard and another 50 people swam ashore, Bhola government administrator Gullal Singh said in a telephone interview. Rescue work was suspended as night fell. Officials feared that many of the missing people were dead. Brazilian satellite launch destroyed after ignition glitch     RIO DE JANEIRO - A Brazilian rocket carrying a research satellite was destroyed three minutes after launch yesterday when the second stage failed to ignite, the Air Force said.     The Brazilian-built VLS rocket took off from the Alcantara Launch Center near Sao Luis, 1,400 miles northwest of Rio, Gen. Tiago Ribeiro said in a televised news conference from the site.     The $7.5 million rocket was intended to place in orbit the Saci-2 satellite, built to study the earth's atmosphere and magnetic fields.
