PORT VILA, Vanuatu - Eight people were confirmed dead, more than 100 injured and thousands left homeless after a severe earthquake and tsunami struck this South Pacific nation early yesterday.    The undersea earthquake, with a magnitude of 7.1, was centered about 55 miles north of Vanuatu's capital, Port Vila. It caused extensive damage on Pentecost Island, crumbling homes and setting off landslides that wiped out roads and telephone lines, said Leiwa Pakoa, operations officer at Vanuatu's National Disaster Management Office.    Five people were killed in the quake, either by landslides or collapsing buildings, Pakoa said.    The earthquake set off the tsunami, or giant wave, which crashed over the southern part of the island about 30 minutes later, destroying homes in villages along the coast.    Three bodies were recovered in the area and two people were still missing at nightfall, Pakoa said.     The full extent of the damage could not be determined immediately, as landslides cut off the dirt road linking the scattered population. Communication via the small number of telephones on the island was difficult.    About 100 people were injured, most in the earthquake, Pakoa said. Dozens were being airlifted to neighboring islands and to Port Vila for treatment.    Prime Minister Barak Sope expressed sorrow at the tragedy, Radio Australia reported.    The quake was felt through much of the nation, a group of about 80 islands 1,550 miles northeast of Sydney, Australia, but the worst-hit island was Pentecost, which has a population of about 12,000.    "It is quite a populated island and the damage is very extensive - landslides, buildings collapsed and roads damaged," Pakoa said.    "The ground is still very soft," and authorities feared further landslides, he said.     Vanuatu Catholic Church administrator Father Celestine Tari said the quake had damaged the Melsisi mission's Catholic church, built by the French in the last century and the largest in Vanuatu. Other churches, which are the most substantial structures on the island, were also hard hit.     Most people on Pentecost island live in simple hut-style housing made of local material that was easily damaged but could also easily be rebuilt.     Michael Eccleshall, an Englishman who teaches at Ramwadi school, said much of the island's basic infrastructure was likely to have been destroyed. "The school where I have been teaching at has been basically leveled," he said.    Pentecost is famous for its residents' so-called "land dives." Divers jump from wooden scaffolds with vines tied to their ankles, a sport hailed as the precursor to bungee jumping.
