PASADENA - The 7.1-magnitude earthquake in the Southern California desert last weekend produced a nerve-rattling conversation between two of the state's fault lines, scientists said.    Hours after Saturday morning's massive Hector Mine quake tore a 25-mile-long gash from a dry lake through the Mojave Desert, some seismologists were alarmed by a series of earthquakes as powerful as 4.0 that struck 120 miles away near the Salton Sea, a few miles from the massive San Andreas Fault.    "It's very clear that the faults in this area are talking to each other," said Lucy Jones, a U.S. Geological Survey seismologist. "It's not clear what exactly that pattern is," so scientists can't predict another quake resulting from this one.    Saturday's largest quake, which struck at 2:46 a.m. in a sparsely populated stretch of desert, caused minor injuries on an Amtrak train that derailed.    Scientists upgraded the quake's magnitude from 7.0 to 7.1 yesterday, a 25 percent increase in shaking.    Last night, the Hector quake generated two more aftershocks in the area where the original temblor struck.    A 4.0-magnitude quake centered 37 miles from Baker and a 4.1-magnitude quake 18 miles from Joshua Tree were recorded at 7:38 p.m., said Karen Kahler, a seismologist at the California Institute of Technology.    Although most seismologists say there is no connection among the large quakes that have occurred recently around the world, some experts are considering links between the Hector quake and a 7.5-magnitude temblor that killed 27 people in Mexico last month, said Kate Hutton, another seismologist at CalTech.    "There's a small minority who believe there may be a connection," she said. Hutton said she found the link between the Salton Sea and Hector quakes "more likely," considering the relative close distance between them.    Although most temblors trigger other quakes in the immediate vicinity, large earthquakes can have far-reaching effects, Jones said. In 1992, a 7.3-magnitude quake in Landers, Calif., was responsible for quakes as far away as Yellowstone National Park in Wyoming, she said.Caption:  PHOTOMARK ZALESKI / THE (RIVERSIDE, CALIF.) PRESS-ENTERPRISE: GEOLOGISTS EXAMINE A SECTION OF THE LAVIC LAKE FAULT LINE EXPOSED BY SATURDAY'S 7.1-MAGNITUDE EARTHQUAKE IN CALIFORNIA.
