TAIWAN accounts for 10 percent of the world's chip-making capacity and 80 percent of the "motherboards" used to run personal computers. But disruptions aren't expected to last.      Taiwan's exporters could suffer disruptions for more than a week because of widespread power outages and the closure of the port of Taichung, but the country's trade-dependent economy is expected to recover quickly from the earthquake that occurred there early yesterday morning.     The earthquake that struck near Taipei doesn't appear to have caused major structural harm to Hsinchu Science-based Industrial Park, the high-tech region south of the city that is home to Taiwan's world-renowned chip makers and computer manufacturers.     Damage appeared to be largely limited to power outages that have disrupted production. Good news for U.S.      That is good news for the hundreds of U.S. and other foreign companies that rely on Taiwanese production.     Taiwan, which has a $53 billion trade relationship with the United States, is a major supplier of electronic and computer components, textiles and chemicals, and a buyer of American aerospace products and farm commodities.     IBM, Compaq, Cisco Systems and other U.S. firms with Taiwan operations reported no damage to their buildings or injuries to employees but were still assessing their supply networks.     Taiwan's semiconductor sector accounts for about 10 percent of the world's chip-making capacity and about 80 percent of the "motherboards" used to run personal computers, according to the Semiconductor Industry Association. Many of the island's factories work under contract for chip companies in other countries.      The Taiwan government estimated hundreds of millions of dollars in lost production for chip makers such as United Microelectronics, Winbond Electronics and Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing.     Electronics make up a third of Taiwan's exports.     The Taiwan stock market was closed yesterday and was to remain shut until Monday, but commercial banks and foreign-exchange market in Taipei were open.     Finance Minister Paul Chiu said equity and futures markets would be closed tomorrow, because not all security firms have had power restored. Friday is a holiday during which all financial markets will be shut.     Stocks of the nation's leading chip makers and Acer, the giant computer firm, fell sharply in overseas trading after the quake. Stocks recover      Today, however, Taiwan stocks rebounded in overseas trading, led by Taiwan Semiconductor Manufacturing, as concern began to ease that the quake will interrupt production for long.     While the secondary port of Taichung near the quake's epicenter was shut down, Taiwan's major airports and its leading port in Kaoshiung remained open. Shippers said collapsed roads and bridges, however, could cause delays.    Taiwan's latest forecasts had predicted economic growth of 5.7 percent this year. According to the investment bank CS First Boston, the quake might trim that figure by 0.2 to 0.4 of a percentage point, and likely have no impact on Taiwan's growth in 2000.     Observers predict that Taiwan, the world's 13th-largest trading nation, would probably suffer a sharp short-term decrease in exports.     But a quick rebound was expected as the Taiwanese government taps its $90 billion cache of foreign reserves to fund a massive reconstruction effort.   Finance Minister Chiu said banks will be directed to extend the maturity on corporate loans to qualified companies by six months. Effect on Asia      The disaster is not expected to affect Asia's economic recovery.  South Korea, Singapore, Malaysia and Thailand could benefit if manufacturers step up production to make up for lost Taiwan output.     Foreign companies were having trouble getting through to their Taiwan offices, because telephone and fax service was disrupted, and quake aftershocks damaged an underwater cable providing Internet connections between Asia and the United States.     "Seasonal PC-market demand is getting stronger, so if there's not enough component supply (such as chips for computer memory and for accelerating the display of graphic images), it could have an impact on PC prices," said Mario Morales, a chip analyst with International Data, based in Framingham, Mass.     However, initial damage estimates suggest that the dislocations will be short-lived.     Jim Ballingall, a vice president for UMC Group, another large chip maker, said his company's six fabrication plants in Hsinchu are now operating on emergency power, with full power restoration expected by today. He predicted no long-term dislocations in either production or shipping. Compiled from Los Angeles Times, Bloomberg News, Reuters and The Associated Press.Caption:  MAPTHE AP: TAIWAN'S EARTHQUAKE DAMAGE (MAP NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY)
