IZMIT, Turkey - A strong tremor and aftershock hit northwestern Turkey today, killing one person and injuring dozens, sending quake-damaged buildings crashing down in a shower of bricks and debris and terrifying survivors of the devastating quake two weeks ago.    An Istanbul hospital confirmed that a 30-year-old man was killed by falling debris in Izmit. The Anatolia news agency cited other hospital officials as saying at least 166 people were hurt.    In towns throughout the quake zone, frightened people wept, fainted and fled into the streets when the tremor hit. Some leaped from windows in panic.    At least seven buildings collapsed, Anatolia reported.    "I saw the walls cracking, the cupboard fell in front of me, and I was about to pass out - I was scared," said 20-year-old Mustafa Kabil, who was in his house in the town of Kullar.    Istanbul's main observatory said the quake's magnitude was 5.2, the sharpest tremor since the hours just after the 7.4-magnitude earthquake on Aug. 17, which killed at least 14,202 people and left more than half a million homeless. Thousands of others are still missing.    The strong tremor could be felt in Istanbul, 50 miles from Izmit. It came after a series of smaller aftershocks had rattled the quake zone overnight.    In Izmit, the quake and a 4.6-magnitude aftershock about 20 minutes later sparked panic, with people rushing outside for fear that buildings would collapse. Even workers in the town's government-run quake crisis center abandoned their offices and went to work in tents outside.    Three smaller overnight aftershocks measured between magnitude 3.1 and 3.3, the Istanbul observatory reported. More than 1,000 aftershocks have shaken Turkey since the Aug. 17 quake.    In the ravaged town of Adapazari, where more than 1,500 buildings are so badly damaged that they are slated for immediate demolition, chunks of concrete fell as weakened buildings shook. Some of them shifted on their wrecked foundations.    Milling crowds of fearful people filled the streets, and the Adapazari governor's office made loudspeaker announcements calling for calm.    Gardens, parks and open spaces were crowded with people afraid to go indoors. Authorities urged people not to go back into damaged buildings to retrieve furniture or valuables.    Public anger against contractors whose shoddily built apartment houses collapsed in the quake has been running high.    In the town of Duzce, near Adapazari, prosecutors issued arrest warrants for 33 people held responsible for the collapse of several buildings in which 1,117 people died and hundreds were injured.    Those being sought included contractors, owners and engineers who worked on the buildings, prosecutor Bilal Gunduz told the Anatolia news agency. Sixteen were already in police custody.
