The bottom line at the Seismological Society of America meeting this week in Seattle: determining the shape of the Seattle basin will help determine when and how bad the next big earthquake will be.     Seattle sits atop a 40 million-year-old basin. Scientists now know a bit more about the geometry of the basin - it's about 37 miles wide and 19 miles long - and have a better sense of the types of sediment and rock that form it because of a series of experiments launched last spring.     Called the Seismic Hazards Investigation in Puget Sound (SHIPS), scientists with the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) shot sound waves beneath the water to construct an image of the Earth's crust. It's the seismological version of a CAT scan combined with an ultrasound, explained Tom Brocher, a USGS seismologist.     Scientists found that the Seattle basin is less solid than first believed. Its consistency of soft soils and weak rocks tends to amplify the shaking during quakes, according to Michael Fischer of the USGS, one of several researchers who spoke about the SHIPS data. The seismological conference continues at Seattle Center through tomorrow.     The early data, pointed out Arben Pitarka, a seismologist with URS Greiner Woodward Clyde Federal Services of Pasadena,  gives scientists a better framework for predicting and preparing for quakes.     "Now we can treat the geometry of the basin more seriously," he said.     For example, Pitarka used SHIPS data to determine how severely the ground would shake in a 6.5-magnitude earthquake on the Seattle Fault. Because of the type of sediment and rock, the motion would be stronger and last longer in the central part of the basin - downtown Seattle.     That's similar to the severe shaking that occurred in Kobe, Japan, in 1995, and in Santa Monica, Calif., during the 1994 Northridge quake, Pitarka said. More than 6,000 died in Kobe; 72 died in the California quake.     More research on the basin is needed, he said, especially in regard to the shape of the Seattle Fault, which runs from Bremerton through Seattle to Issaquah.     The discovery of the Seattle Fault and the one large earthquake it produced 1,100 years ago - and whether the fault will trigger other large earthquakes - has heightened the interest in determining the geometry of the Seattle basin and other areas below Puget Sound.     The fault is known as a "bad actor" among local seismologists, said Brian Sherrod, a University of Washington geologist, because the epicenter would be so close to the Earth's surface.     A band of shallow earthquakes west of Lake Washington and a 4.9 magnitude temblor in June 1997 near Bainbridge Island show the fault is active, said Craig Weaver of the USGS.     Previous research also has shown that an earthquake with an epicenter far away - say, 100 miles off the coast - can trigger severe damage in an urban area built atop a basin.     In September, researchers will launch Phase 2 of the SHIPS experiment, setting off explosives in holes bored 150 feet deep. Some 1,000 receivers will record the data along the experiment area, roughly 60 miles extending from the eastern edge of the Olympic National Park, through Seattle and into the Cascade foothills. The goal is to define the basin's eastern boundary.     This phase, which will cost about $500,000, will take about 10 days to complete. Scientists then will need a year to interpret the data, Brocher said. Florangela Davila's phone message number is 206-464-2916. Her e-mail address is: fdavila@seattletimes.com
