ARMENIA, Colombia - Morning mist rises from a hill of broken concrete and twisted metal, the legacy of a deadly earthquake that erased much of this once-prosperous coffee city.    Amid the vultures on this football-field-sized dump where municipal trucks haul tons of rubble each day, dozens of human figures carrying burlap bags search through the rubble for something to sell.    Most have heard tales of searchers finding cash, jewelry or gold amid the debris from banks, stores and other businesses that collapsed in the Jan. 25 quake that devastated Colombia's western coffee belt and killed 1,124 people.    Others search for iron, aluminum and copper to sell to recyclers.    Many of the scavengers are former workers and shopkeepers who lost their homes, jobs and businesses - a new class of desperately poor in Armenia, a city of 300,000.    "The quake destroyed much of Armenia. Its downtown, with most of its businesses, fell to the ground. People's reality turned upside down overnight, and they started thinking of survival," said Luis Carlos Villegas, head of the government's reconstruction commission.    Unemployment in Quindio state stood at 15 percent before the quake and is now expected to rise to 50 percent, said Diego Villegas Restrepo, an aide to Quindio's governor.    An estimated 250,000 people were left without homes after the quake. Many have formed camps of makeshift lean-tos, while others camp out on sidewalks in front of their houses to protect their belongings from looters.    The government estimates the quake caused damages of $1 billion and has promised rebuilding loans. The international community has also pledged tens of millions of dollars. But such funds might not be available for weeks, if not months, and people must fend for themselves in the meantime.    Wearing a dirty T-shirt and a soiled Toronto Blue Jays cap, former restaurant owner Daniel Hernandez looked under slabs of concrete at the dumpsite in northern Armenia.    He lost his home and fried-chicken restaurant in the quake. He lived above his restaurant with his wife and two kids and now has no source of income.    "It's not pretty, but what else can I do to support them?" he said.    He said 70 recyclers work the dump, one of six around Armenia. Scavengers also pick through the remains of thousands of collapsed buildings.    "Sometimes a load of rubble arrives, and you can smell death," Hernandez said.    Rescuers think some bodies still lie under the estimated 500,000 tons of rubble that cover Armenia. Hernandez fears finding a corpse.     Pedro Vargas, 42, dreams of finding a safe he could crack open.    Vargas owned an auto-parts shop in downtown Armenia that collapsed.    "I know a man who found a wallet with $200. Jewelry stores and rich businesses collapse. Some of that stuff must be in here somewhere," he said.    When a new truck arrives to dump its load, recyclers hustle over to be first at the debris.    "I never in my life thought I'd be doing this," Vargas said. "I pray it's temporary."Caption:  PHOTOJAIME PUEBLA / AP: TATIANA CASTILLO, 5, CRIES IN THE RUINS OF HER HOUSE, WHICH WAS DESTROYED IN THE JAN. 25 QUAKE IN COLOMBIA.
