ASSISI, Italy - St. Francis' Basilica of Assisi was a soaring, sunlit frame for some of the finest frescoes of medieval Europe - until a 1997 earthquake shook the pictures from their frames and sent them roaring down in a cloud of debris that crushed four people.    Today, the 47 Franciscan brothers reopen their 13th-century basilica with a ceremony consecrating an altar that replaces one destroyed in the quake.    The quakes killed 10 people in the hill towns of central Italy, left thousands homeless and cracked priceless medieval and Renaissance sites across Umbria and Tuscany. None of the damaged art was as irreplaceable as St. Francis' Basilica, begun by followers of St. Francis just months after his death.    The shower of debris in the upper basilica came from the collapse of two vaults in the 278-foot ceiling.    Firefighters later  swept up 300,000 fragments - flakes of paint the size of postage stamps, or smaller.    With that, the  project of restoring the basilica - which has cost $17 million so far - began.    Structural experts reinforced it with a flexible rib cage stronger than steel,  removed 1,320 tons of debris and haphazard additions that had been weighing it down, and filled cracks.    Workers went over ceiling and walls with syringes, injecting specially created mortar to strengthen the grip of still-intact paintings.    In workrooms, crews labored every day for two years to identify and number fragments, finding each flake's rightful place with the aid of digital images.    Frescoes of St. Rufino, patron of Assisi, and another in a series of nine saints attributed to Giotti have been returned to the vault above the entrance for today's reopening.    The two haloed saints are 80 percent complete - better than many of the restored works will be when the work is done.    The fallen fragments made up only 1,800 of 50,000 square feet of artwork - some of the most exuberant colors to be found in the gloomy world of the Gothic.    The restoration of the basilica remains a work in progress - as does the restoration of normalcy to the lives of quake victims.    Thousands who lost their homes in the 1997 earthquake face a third Christmas in what were meant to be temporary trailer camps.    About 3,500 of Umbria's 12,000 quake homeless moved into the temporary trailer housing, known to Italians as "container camps." About 3,200 of them are still there.    "We have been patient. But this is too slow," said Ulderico Pecci, whose first child was born at the camp.    Luciano Tortioli, regional director of rebuilding, said most families still in the tin homes chose to stay because they found work nearby.    Others said they were waiting for the reconstruction, held up because there was more to do than there  were builders to do it.    The history of state-funded rebuilding projects gives Umbria's earthquake victims little reason to hope they'll be out of the temporary homes soon; those made homeless by earthquakes in southern Italy lived in "temporary" camps for decades.    Church and regional officials said it was best for everyone to have hurried the reopening of the basilica, which is both a symbol of hope and the engine that drives tourism in the towns of central Italy.    Pezzi disagrees, despite having lost his waiter's job in Assisi after the quake. He works now as a carpenter, making too little to pay the quake-inflated rents for existing housing.    "They should help the people," he said.Caption:  PHOTOPIER PAOLO CITO / THE ASSOCIATED PRESS: ST. FRANCIS' BASILICA OF ASSISI IN ITALY REOPENS TODAY AFTER AN EARTHQUAKE DAMAGED THE BUILDING IN 1997. WORKERS HAVE PIECED TOGETHER THOUSANDS OF FRESCO FRAGMENTS TO RESTORE THE ARTWORK.
