MEXICO CITY - A powerful earthquake that struck southern Mexico last week damaged the important pre-Hispanic ruins of Monte Alban and other archeological sites in the state of Oaxaca, an official said yesterday.     Samira Hernandez of the National Anthropology and History Institute (INAH) in the state capital, Oaxaca city, said 18 buildings in the ancient Zapotec city of Monte Alban suffered moderate or partial damage in Thursday's temblor.     "According to preliminary reports, 18 buildings were damaged partially or moderately, some walls collapsed and stucco fell off," Hernandez said.     Measuring 7.5 - in the same league as a quake that killed 2,000 in Taiwan last month and an August quake in Turkey in which 15,000 died - the earthquake could have wrought severe devastation in built-up areas.     But it struck near the sparsely populated Pacific coast of Oaxaca and originated deep below the ground, minimizing its impact. The latest death toll is 20.     Founded around 600 B.C. and abandoned around 1,300 years later, Monte Alban looms over the Oaxaca valley from its vantage point on a high hill outside the state capital.     With tombs found to be full of gold, silver and jade jewelry, the 25-square-mile site ranks as one of Mexico's premier archeological treasures.     Its temples, palaces and pyramids, some displaying Olmec influences from the eastern states of Tabasco and Veracruz, were decorated with intricate frescoes of what variously have been taken to be dancers, prisoners of war or even the ceremonies of a bizarre sex cult.     Monte Alban became world known after the discovery, verified in 1932 by Mexican anthropologists, of Tomb 7, a spectacular burial chamber filled with treasures and ornaments in quantities rarely matched through the Mesoamerican world.     Hernandez said a group of experts from Mexico City was inspecting the ruins yesterday and the site had been closed to tourists because of the danger of falling debris.     She said another precious archeological site, Mitla, 25 miles southeast of Oaxaca city, also suffered damage.
