TAIPEI - A powerful aftershock rocked Taiwan early today, and first reports indicated that at least one 12-story residential building had collapsed and was burning in the central region of the island.    The U.S. Geological Survey said the new tremor measured 6.5.    An 18-year-old man and a 25-year-old woman were killed when their car was buried by a shock-triggered landslide in the central Taiwan county of Yulin, a radio report said. The Broadcast Corporation of China said two others were injured on the same road.    Two Taiwanese rescue workers were injured by falling rubble from a crippled building in the town of Dali.  Another 11 persons were injured by flying glass and other debris inside a rice wine distillery in the town of Puli. Officials feared an explosion might occur after a gas leak was detected following the temblor.    Three hours after the latest jolt, as rescuers were losing hope, two brothers were pulled alive from a 12-story, downtown Taipei building that collapsed in the first quake. Sun Chi-kwang, 20, and Sun Chi-feng, 25, survived the ordeal by drinking their urine and eating apples.     The earthquake that devastated central Taiwan early Tuesday measured 7.6. The Disaster Management Center said late yesterday that 2,002 people had been killed, 8,544 injured, 209 were trapped under rubble and 23 were missing from that earthquake.     Officials previously cited a death toll of nearly 2,200 people, but that was reduced early yesterday after the government discovered that two hard-hit counties had double-counted some victims.    Rescuers, among them American and South Korean teams, headed today for Minchien village in Nantou County, where a damaged residential building was reported to have collapsed in the 6.5 aftershock.  The report said the building fell on government offices in the village.    The aftershock lasted almost a minute and shook buildings in the capital, 100 miles from its epicenter.    About 4,000 aftershocks, most of them minor, have rocked Taiwan since Tuesday's quake. Yesterday's aftershock came less than a day after President Lee Teng-hui issued an emergency decree to speed up rescue and rebuilding operations.    Rescue officials acknowledged earlier that many people might still be buried in the remote hill country in central Nantou County, around the epicenter of Tuesday's quake.    Hugh Lin, director of civil affairs, said rescuers had not been able to get supplies and help to the remote region mainly inhabited by aboriginal Taiwanese, an ethnic Malaysian race.     Lin said helicopters were making 500 flights a day to locate the stricken areas for airdrops.     The forecast for tropical storms threatened to worsen the plight of 80,000 people camped in parks, schools and sports grounds.    "We're prepared with tents and raincoats for heavy rain, but we're not ready for a landslide," Lin said. "That's our biggest concern."     The emergency degree is expected to cut through red tape and speed relief and reconstruction work.  The Cabinet vote yesterday to impose emergency conditions allows Teng-hui to personally order relief spending and other measures.    Meanwhile, the Taichung prosecutor froze passports of 16 builders and architects pending an investigation into possible faulty construction.Caption:  PHOTOWALLY SANTANA / THE AP: A TAIWANESE WOMAN PRAYS YESTERDAY NEAR HER APARTMENT BUILDING IN DALI, TAIWAN. IT WAS DESTROYED IN LAST TUESDAY'S EARTHQUAKE.
