ARMENIA, Colombia - The death toll surpassed 1,000 today from a powerful earthquake that destroyed nearly two-thirds of all the buildings in this western Colombian city.    Stunned residents in Colombia's coffee belt chose to wait out the night around bonfires rather than venture back into their crumpled homes after the magnitude-6 quake, which injured hundreds.    The earthquake flattened cities and towns across western Colombia yesterday afternoon, rattling buildings as far away as the capital, Bogota, 140 miles from the epicenter.    Hundreds of the dead lived in Armenia, a city of 220,000 residents where entire neighborhoods were reduced to rubble and left without water or electricity, and where residents say relief has been slow to arrive.    Capt. Ciro Antonio Guiza, the city's deputy fire chief, said rescue workers were so strapped that many bodies remained on the streets uncollected.    "There are more than 1,000 dead, perhaps more than 2,000 in Armenia alone," he said.    Hundreds of bodies were trapped in 25 buildings that collapsed, he said. In one 10-story apartment building alone, an estimated 60 people were killed,  Guiza said.    About 700 buildings were destroyed and 180,000 people left homeless in Armenia alone, said Colombian Red Cross official Carlos Gilberto Giraldo.      Guiza said 60 percent of the city was destroyed. Worst hit were the poor southern districts. About 340 bodies were collected at a makeshift morgue, but it would be hours before hundreds more could be recovered, he said.    Armenia's three-story fire station tumbled in pieces onto its 14 vehicles. At least nine people were killed when the building's concrete floors and pillars came crashing down. Officers were also feared killed in the collapse of a police barracks.    Five members of the Colombian professional soccer club Atletico Quindio - three Argentines and two Brazilians - were also feared dead in the ruins of a hotel in downtown Armenia.    "There's no way to measure this crisis," said Alvaro Patino,  Armenia's mayor.    "There isn't a point in the city's geography which was not affected by this horrific tragedy," Patino told RCN radio. "We need everything . . . medicine, clothes . . . electric generators," he said, urging Colombians in the United States to send aid.    As Colombians reeled from the worst temblor to hit the country since a 1994 earthquake killed 800 people, relief efforts continued through the night. Rescue from collapsed building     To applause from a crowd in the center of Armenia, Colombian Red Cross workers early today excavated three men who were trapped on the first floor of a four-story building for more than 13 hours.    The men were having coffee in a first-floor pawn shop and saved themselves by ducking between a large safe and the wall just before the floors above came down on them.    President Andres Pastrana toured the disaster zone, vowing more federal aid after daybreak and urging his countrymen to chip in. Heeding the call, donors formed long lines at Bogota blood banks and rang telethons.    Landslides - which had slowed the arrival of rescue equipment and supplies - were cleared, and convoys of government vehicles with cranes and other heavy equipment converged on the disaster zone.    Schools and stadiums were converted to makeshift shelters and morgues.    The governments of Nicaragua and Guatemala, which are still recovering from damage inflicted by Hurricane Mitch three months ago, pledged to send relief supplies and rescuers to the area. Mexico, whose capital suffered heavy damage in a major 1985 earthquake, also pledged assistance. History of deadly quakes     Monday's quake was the deadliest since 1875, when about 1,000 people died in a tremor near Cucuta, a border city with Venezuela.    Colombia's worst disaster was a 1985 volcanic eruption in central Tolima state that destroyed an entire town and killed 23,000 people.    "If hell exists, this is it," Alfonso Ramirez, a resident of Armenia, told the Bogota daily newspaper El Espectador.     Ramirez said he had just finished eating lunch with his wife when the quake struck. A neighbor's house had collapsed, he said, adding that he was able to rescue three children from the rubble but was almost certain the children's mother and another sibling had been killed inside.     Iliana Patricia Vega, 26, paced the working-class Brasilia Nueva district in tears. "Oh, my baby, he was so beautiful," she said of her 10-year-old son, Jon Alexander.    She was on the second floor with her son and 6-year-old daughter when everything collapsed, killing the boy almost immediately.    Across the street, Pedro Maria Londono, 46, and the rest of his four-member family were miraculously saved when every room but the one they were in was destroyed.    "In 12 seconds, I lost what took 20 years to build," Londono said. Information from The Dallas Morning News is included in this report.Caption:  PHOTO: MAP1) JAVIER CASSELLA / AP: A RESIDENTIAL NEIGHBORHOOD IN  ARMENIA, COLOMBIA, 110 MILES WEST OF BOGOTA, LIES IN RUBBLE AFTER  YESTERDAY'S MAGNITUDE-6 EARTHQUAKE.2) THE AP: RESCUE WORKERS TRY TO FREE AN INJURED MAN FROM EARTHQUAKE  RUBBLE IN PEREIRA, COLOMBIA, YESTERDAY. THE MAN LATER DIED OF HIS  INJURIES. (PHOTO RAN IN EARLY EDITION)3) AP: EARTHQUAKE EPICENTER (MAP NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY)
