ISTANBUL, Turkey - Four-year-old Ismail Cimen couldn't sleep and was playing with his toy truck when his world went black.    For more than six days, alone in a tiny space below a collapsed balcony, the boy waited for someone to come. But for days, no one was looking. His relatives had given up the search and already prepared his grave.    "A miracle of God" occurred today, his uncle said. Sait Cimen was removing rubble to look for bodies when he shined his flashlight into a gap 18 inches high. Little Ismail squinted into the beam.    Bulgarian and Turkish rescuers helped pull the boy into the weak dawn light after 146 hours in darkness in Cinarcik, 30 miles south of Istanbul. At a time when many search teams are abandoning efforts to find survivors, the black-haired boy shows that the will to live can often defy the normal boundaries of human survival.    "I was playing with my truck. Then I fell," whispered the emaciated and severely dehydrated boy while he rested in an Istanbul hospital. His nails were filled with the brown dirt he clawed at just after the quake struck at 3 a.m. on Aug. 17.    When he realized he was trapped, the boy called for his parents. When they didn't answer, he simply waited. Through badly chapped lips, he summed up his ordeal in the unvarnished honesty of a child: "I was very scared."     "We thought he was dead, too," his uncle said. "I had even prepared a grave for him in his hometown."     But other graves will be filled: His father and three sisters, ages 8 to 13, were killed. The body of one sister was buried in rubble only a few yards from the boy. The boy's mother, Serife, survived the collapse of the building and is hospitalized in the city of Bursa.    "She is inquiring all the time about whereabouts of her family," the boy's uncle said. She has not been informed of their fate.    Dr. Murad Molla, an emergency-room physician, said the boy was in good condition and should fully recover.Caption:  PHOTOEYAL WARSHAVSKY / AP: ISMAIL CIMEN, 4, RESTS IN A HOSPITAL IN ISTANBUL, TURKEY, TODAY, AFTER SPENDING 146 HOURS IN THE RUBBLE FOLLOWING LAST WEEK'S EARTHQUAKE.
