The mysteries of the Earth are unraveled bit by bit by people, like Brian Sherrod, who love looking at rocks.     Fascinated with fossils since he was a young boy, Sherrod is a geologist at the University of Washington, where among many duties he teaches Geology 101 to a lecture hall of 350 undergraduates each quarter. If he's lucky, one, two, maybe three students will fall in love with his chosen profession, which is misunderstood, Sherrod explained the other day.     Yes, he stares at rocks, he admits, but a good part of his time is spent thigh high in wet, squishy marshland, a fact he points out with much relish.     How the Earth works, the processes it goes through and how the environments have changed over time are what excite him, he says. And time means something for Sherrod only if it's, oh, a span of 1,000 years or more.     "Most people think a decade is a long time. Geologically, it's like yesterday," he says, snapping his fingers. "A second. Like that!"      Sherrod and four other scientists will talk about prehistoric earthquakes, the causes of modern-day earthquakes and earthquake hazards in the Puget Sound area during a free public forum tomorrow night at Seattle Center.      The forum is being held in conjunction with the 94th annual meeting of the Seismological Society of America, which runs tomorrow through Wednesday.     Scientists also will present preliminary results of a U.S. Geological Survey project in which sound waves were shot into Puget Sound to produce a more-detailed image of the Earth's crust.     Seismology is really a chain of detective work. One scientist figures out where a fault might be located, explains Sherrod. Another, such as Sherrod, looks for evidence of ground movement. Another determines the size of the earthquake and whether there were others along that same fault.     Sherrod is a paleoseismologist, whose sleuthing requires him to slip into salt marshes and tide flats to survey and uncover the sediment and fossil record of the Earth's changes.     One of the most fascinating sites these days - a small marsh on Bainbridge Island's Restoration Point - contains a 7,500-year record of environmental change, Sherrod says. It could provide additional information about the Seattle Fault. The fault, first detailed in 1992, runs east to west from Bremerton through south Bainbridge Island, through downtown Seattle and along I-90 to Issaquah.     Seismologically speaking, the Puget Sound area is considered much more interesting than California, scientists say. The region's complex network of faults and tectonic plates - like two giant jigsaw pieces trying to slip underneath each other - triggers quakes here.     But unlike in the desert landscape of California, vegetation covering Washington makes it difficult to find evidence of shifts in the Earth's crust.     A technology called LIDAR or Light Distance and Ranging, affixed to an aircraft, is therefore extremely useful to local seismologists.     Unlike aerial photographs from regular cameras, LIDAR mapping cuts through thick canopies of forests to reveal a much more precise picture.     Scientists had tromped about a marshy area on south Bainbridge Island for quite some time without finding the scarp, or rupture in the ground, that a LIDAR map of the island clearly shows, Sherrod explains.     Discovery of the scarp casts that much more light on the Seattle Fault.     The size of the fault and how often earthquakes occur along it are unknown, but local seismologists agree it is dangerous. According to scientists, the fault is capable of producing some of the most severe earthquakes.     Early research indicates a quake along the Seattle Fault could trigger shaking close to 75 percent the force of gravity in some areas, according to Bill Steele, coordinator of the UW's Seismology Lab. That is akin to the catastrophic jolt of the 7.2 magnitude quake in Kobe, Japan, that killed more than 6,300 people in 1995.     New data from the geological survey is being used to update seismic maps for the Seattle area that in turn will have a bearing on building codes. Current codes are based on less-severe quakes.     "The more we look, the more we find; the greater our estimation of geological hazards," says Steele. ------------------------------- Free public forum The Seismological Society of America will hold a free public forum from 7:30 to 9:30 p.m. tomorrow in the Pacific Northwest Rooms at Seattle Center. For more information, look up the Web site www.geophys.washington. edu/SEIS/SSA99
