FENGYUAN, Taiwan - When rescuers lifted Lin Yo Long to safety through a hole drilled into the rubble two days after an earthquake buried him alive, he was clutching a bottle of champagne and the mobile phone that saved his life.    "I never gave up hope. I knew from newspaper reports people can survive a long time," he said.   "Finish it off," he told his rescuers, offering them the rest of a bottle of German champagne, which he had kept for four years because it  "was in such a beautiful bottle" and had never intended to drink.   In this small industrial town near the epicenter of this week's earthquake , which  has killed at least 2,151 people, the rescue of Lin, 33, gave disaster-response crews fresh hope.    Today, rescuers pulled a 6-year-old boy from a wrecked apartment building where he and his family had been buried for 87 hours.    "A person can survive for a week, even for two weeks, if they have some liquid. We will find more," said French fireman Eric Jourdain, one of six  French rescuers who arrived yesterday with their sniffer dogs from the earthquake in Turkey as part of an international rescue force.  The quake had brought down the eight floors above Lin, trapping his legs under a pillar.   Soon after  he heard water rushing outside -  the Shih Gang Dam, which supplies the town with drinking water, had broken and was emptying.    He groped around for hours, coming across the champagne and then his mobile phone. He dialed an emergency number several times without getting an answer. But one of his calls to the police had gone through, and early yesterday  he heard voices and began to bang against the ceiling. Then his phone rang: "Are you hurt?" a voice asked.    Despite continuing rescue efforts, the focus began to shift to helping the thousands of Taiwanese camped in the open, homeless or too scared to return to their houses.   In Tungshih, the worst-hit city,  volunteers - many of whom had lost their own houses - were out in force, peeling fresh vegetables and stir-frying noodles in industrial-size woks to keep thousands of newly homeless people and rescue workers well-fed.      Others helped unload trucks arriving with donated supplies, stacking thousands of boxes of food, blankets and tents in parks.     Some volunteers handed weary truck drivers freshly made, surprisingly tasty meals.       The government admits it was not prepared to cope with a disaster of such magnitude, even though Taiwan is prone to periodic quakes.    After inspecting disaster areas on Wednesday, President Lee Teng-hui criticized the lack of central coordination and inefficient use of manpower and supplies.     At Taipei's city-hall square yesterday, some of the thousands of people who answered a call for blood were turned away in disappointment because of a shortage of blood bags.    The newspaper United Daily News said many disaster areas were getting huge supplies of rice despite a lack of water and power with which to prepare them. "How are they supposed to cook rice without water and gas?" it said. "Instant noodles and potato chips are also in oversupply."      "Please don't send any goods. What we need is cash," said Pang Pai-hsien, magistrate of Nantou county.   At one food-pickup point, a big box of pineapple mooncakes sat open, a sad reminder that today, which is Autumn Moon Festival, normally a day of happiness, family reunions and feasting,  was instead a time of grieving for many.   The round pastries are traditionally eaten during the festival, the Chinese equivalent of Thanksgiving, when the harvest moon is said to be at its fullest. Information from The Associated Press, Reuters, The Washington Post and  Los Angeles Times is included in this report.Caption:  PHOTOAP: SHIH GANG DAM IN CENTRAL TAIWAN BROKE IN THIS WEEK'S EARTHQUAKE. IT EMPTIED, LEAVING THE CITY OF FENGYUAN WITHOUT DRINKING WATER.
