PUEBLA, Mexico - Loosened by an earthquake, chunks of brick and plaster were thrown from the baroque cupolas' graceful arches, landing on a cracked floor at the state university of Puebla.    Tuesday's magnitude 6.7 earthquake also shoved stairways sideways and left wide cracks snaking ominously across the blue-and-white cupolas in this central Mexican town.    Stunned by the death of 17 people in the region - a toll that was expected to rise - residents of this city of 1.2 million also mourned the damage to buildings whose baroque, renaissance and Arabic-influenced architecture have been a source of pride and a draw for tourists from around the world.    "Some of the damage is irreversible in the loss of stonework and tiles," said architect Federico Bautista Alonso, who estimated that 250 buildings, including modern structures, were damaged in the city.    Other historic buildings damaged in Puebla include the San Agustin church, with a bell tower cut in half; the church of La Soledad; and the neoclassical city hall, which lost an entire floor.    Workers shrouded in clouds of dust labored under hot sun in the city center yesterday, dumping huge piles of debris from the city hall into dump trucks.    Colonial-era buildings were damaged in other parts of central Mexico as well, including the cathedral of Cuernavaca, founded in the 16th century.    Puebla's Council of the Historic Center, a neighborhood association, told Bautista the damage in the city could total almost $25 million.    As of yesterday, the federal government had pledged almost $50,000 to help rebuild. But because Puebla is a U.N. cultural landmark, Bautista said he also hoped for aid from UNESCO.    "But our first priorities are the schools and houses," he added. "We value our heritage, but we have to live."     About 40 residents of five apartment buildings destroyed or heavily damaged in the quake stood in the street yesterday, impatiently waiting for word from the government about when they could recover their belongings.    Police stood guard behind a closed wrought-iron fence in a courtyard leading to their homes.    State officials said 4,000 people had been left temporarily homeless by the quake. Thousands more were forced from their damaged homes in Oaxaca and Veracruz states, and in Mexico City.    At a local hospital, Teachers College librarian Josefina Walles Morales, 53, lay in an intensive-care ward with a broken leg, fractured vertebrae, a punctured lung and bruises all over.    The brick ceiling of the 19th century library fell on her. She called her survival a miracle.    Typical Mexican earthquakes are centered in the Pacific Ocean off the coast of the states of Guerrero or Oaxaca and are felt most strongly in the Mexican capital.    But experts said Tuesday's quake originated hundreds of miles inland near the Oaxaca-Puebla border and focused much of its force on Puebla. Information from the Dallas Morning News is included in this report.Caption:  PHOTOGREGORY BULL / AP: ONE DAY AFTER THE EARTH SHOOK, A WORKER YESTERDAY LOOKS UPWARD AT THE DAMAGED DOME OF THE PARROQUIA DE SAN ANDRES CHOLULA CHURCH IN CHOLULA. THE MAGNITUDE 6.7 QUAKE TOOK A TOLL ON MANY HISTORIC BUILDINGS.
