No pricey earthquake insurance policy for Bill Steele, a man who is "handy with a hammer" and believes it makes sense to retrofit a house but not to spend money on premiums.    That might seem odd when you learn that Steele is coordinator of the University of Washington seismology lab, and knows more about earthquakes than most Puget Sound residents.     But Steele, who has lived in earthquake-prone California and Seattle, says damages to single-family homes often equal the cost of insurance premiums plus the deductibles homeowners must pay for quake coverage. So he is putting his time and money into retrofitting his 1908 North Seattle home - bolting the house to the foundation, reinforcing pony walls, strapping the hot-water heater to studs.     Steele realizes his view may be controversial. And he is not saying earthquake insurance is not a good option for some people. But as a skilled carpenter and someone who believes retrofits mitigate many quake losses, he has chosen the no-quake insurance path.     Roger Faris takes the opposite view. Faris, of the Phinney Neighborhood Association which helps host workshops on earthquake retrofitting, has retrofitted his house and carries quake insurance. However, he was shocked to find that his deductible doubled this year.     Rising rates and higher deductibles are among several changes in earthquake insurance.     In the past three to five years, deductibles have risen from 5 to 10 percent of the value of the house, according to Karl J. Newman, executive director of the Washington Insurance Council. Mutual of Enumclaw applies a 15 percent deductible to local quake policies. Parts of Eastern Washington where scientists have been able to determine there is a lower risk for quake damage have not been hit by the same increases.     Steele said some insurance carriers are considering discounts for consumers who retrofit their houses, or hire a qualified contractor to do the work.     But I couldn't find any insurers giving discounts. Instead, several carriers said they require homeowners to document retrofits to qualify for coverage - period.    There are other changes in earthquake coverage.     A year ago, Safeco made a dramatic change. Instead of selling earthquake insurance as an endorsement or add-on to regular homeowners policies, it became an entirely separate policy. Safeco now covers less and charges more.     The company wanted to offer some kind of earthquake coverage to homeowners who wanted it, but at the same time needed to mitigate its exposure in case of a catastrophic earthquake here, said Tracy Besch, territory underwriting manager who served on a committee that studied the problem for several years.    "We didn't want earthquake (coverage) to be the tail wagging the dog," Besch said.     Before the change, 14 percent of Safeco's customers had quake insurance; now 8.5 percent do.     Safeco also started requiring that houses built before 1980 be retrofitted and that homeowners provide documentation, such as photographs of water heaters strapped to studs, and a contractor's receipt showing the work has been done. Safeco also requires photos of the front and back of the house illustrating how it is placed on the property and showing any significant sloping.     Besch advises homeowners who are doing their own retrofits to take photographs while work is under way.     Pemco doesn't offer a discount for earthquake retrofit, but requires that homes built before 1961 have it done to qualify for insurance.     That date was chosen because King, Pierce and Snohomish counties did not require that a structure be bolted to its foundation before then, according to Steve Watson, Pemco sales manager.     Farmers Insurance is not selling quake coverage at this time. But it did file rates for earthquake coverage with the state insurance commissioner's office in 1995 and 1996. However, there is no law requiring a company to sell a product just because it's been approved.     If Farmers' homeowners policy holders want quake coverage, they will have to consult insurance agents in the specialty market, said Karl J. Newman, executive director of the Washington Insurance Council, a trade group.     You can find specialty market agents in The Yellow Pages under "insurance consultants." Companies like Lloyd's of London sell such products, Newman said, but expect a big price ticket.    Some companies do not sell earthquake coverage for brick houses, or older homes.
