ATHENS, Greece - As rescue workers hacked slowly through mounds of rubble, the death toll from one of the worst quakes to hit Athens this century climbed past 60 today. Some officials feared the number of dead could surpass 80.    With about 80 people missing in collapsed buildings, including 30 feared dead in the rubble of a  detergent factory, crews intensified their efforts to find survivors a day after a magnitude-5.9 quake ripped through the capital's northern suburbs.    In central Athens, there was minor damage to some ancient sites, including the Acropolis. But the nearby towering columns at the Temple of Zeus were spared harm. The National Archaeological Museum reported some damage.    Thousands of Athenians, fearing a new quake, camped out in city parks as aftershocks rumbled through the night.      When the earthquake struck just before 3 p.m. local time in Athens, Allen Angelos did what he was taught as a student in Seattle public schools - he dived under his desk at work and waited for the shaking to stop.     "We've had small earthquakes before since I've been in Greece," Angelos said. "This time it was really big."      His wife, Sylvia, who was at the couple's home in suburban Athens at the time of the quake, saw the walls of their apartment dance and crack, she said.     The couple spent most of the past 24 hours outside their home, sleeping in their car, Angelos said by telephone last night.     "The aftershocks are continuing," said Angelos, 36, a Seattle native who has lived in the Athens area for seven years. He is the son of retired Seattle Times reporter Gus Angelos.    There were more than 700 aftershocks, including eight more than magnitude 4 and a midnight jolt that registered magnitude 4.7. Experts said the strong aftershocks were an indication that the energy built up along the fault line was abating to safe levels.    Most of the damage and casualties were concentrated in working-class and immigrant areas, where construction standards apparently were lower or building shortcuts were made.    Officials declared a one-day state of emergency in the Athens metropolitan area, closed all public schools today and warned people to stay out of even slightly damaged homes. The Athens Stock Exchange also was closed.    Greek media had high praise for a 19-member crew from Turkey's volunteer Akut rescue team, which arrived first and headed straight for the detergent factory after arriving at Athens airport.    Turkey's quick offer of assistance to its traditional rival was a reminder of Greece's aid to its neighbor when it was hit by a devastating quake on Aug. 17 - a move that helped thaw decades of enmity.    Greece, however, was better-equipped to handle yesterday's quake than Turkey. Strict building codes in quake-prone Greece allowed the huge Athens metropolis to ride out the temblor with far less damage than Turkey, where shoddy construction was blamed for near-destruction in some places.    Official emergency crews, police and military forces were on the scene within the hour, compared to hours and even days in Turkey.     The two countries are at odds over sovereignty in the Aegean Sea, minority rights and Cyprus, invaded by Turkey 25 years ago in response to a Greek Cypriot coup sponsored by Greece's military. Times staff reporter Julie Peterson contributed to this report.
