ISSAQUAH - The homemade bread was delicious, the baklava was great and the lamb was cooked just right, but it wasn't the Turkish dishes that were chiefly on the minds of the estimated 400  people that turned out yesterday to enjoy the meals.     Though they brought their appetites to Lake Sammamish State Park, where the Turkish American Cultural Association hosted a picnic, their hearts were back in their homeland,  where thousands died in an Aug. 17 earthquake.     Donations from yesterday's relief effort, including blankets and medical supplies, will go to surviving victims of the 7.4-magnitude quake, which left nearly 14,000 dead and tens of thousands injured.     "We are Turkish, and it is our people who died over there," said Tuna Ertemalp, 33, board member of the association. "There are still people there who we are trying to help, people who are still suffering."     Officials called the event a success.  "It would have been better if the weather had cooperated, but I'm happy right now," Ertemalp said.     Members of the area Turkish community usually gather twice a year for a picnic at the park, but this time they turned the gathering into a relief effort.     Quake victims are in need of items such as sleeping bags, blankets, baby food and medical supplies, including crutches, Ertemalp said. The group has rented a warehouse in Issaquah to hold donated supplies before they are flown to Turkey.     The Seattle-King County chapter of the American Red Cross has two staff people devoted to handling mail that has poured in since the deadly quake.     Several Turkish restaurants and residents donated food to the event to help raise money, while organizers raffled off two tickets on Alaska Airlines.     "I'm here so that I can support the Turkish community," said Suheyl Sokmen, 42, of Seattle, who was at the event with his wife and 12-year-old son. "We're trying to do our best to help."      After the quake, Sokmen said he was worried about his mother, who lives about 15 miles from the quake's epicenter, since her phone line was disconnected after the quake. "We went through 24 hours where we couldn't reach her."      The family eventually learned that she was fine.     Anyone interested in making a donation can do so at any Washington Mutual bank branch (Account No. 195-327160-7).     For more information, call 206-236-8877. More information can be found on the Internet at http://www.ubg.com/helpturkey      Donations also can be sent to the American Red Cross, International Response Fund, P.O. Box 37243, Washington, DC 20013. Donors are asked to indicate "Turkish earthquake relief" on checks. Or call 1-800-HELP-NOW (1-800-435-7669).     "This is ongoing," said Didem Pierson, 31, who stood with Ertugrul Ulkekul, 38, at the entrance to the park area, collecting donations. "The survivors still need our help." Arthur Santana's phone-message number is 206-515-5684. His e-mail address is: asantana@seattletimes.comCaption:  PHOTOPEDRO PEREZ / THE SEATTLE TIMES: UNLOADING DONATIONS FOR TURKISH VICTIMS DURING A PICNIC AT LAKE SAMMAMISH STATE PARK YESTERDAY ARE ERTUGRUL ULKEKUL, LEFT, DIDEM PIERSON AND MEHMET DIKER.
