ISTANBUL, Turkey - With just six survivors rescued yesterday and hopes dimming that more will be found, authorities refocused their efforts on finding shelter for hundreds of thousands of people left homeless by Turkey's massive quake.    But the more than 115,000 buildings demolished or rendered uninhabitable by Tuesday's quake must first be cleared of bodies, which are feared to number in the tens of thousands.    Most of the 30,000 people still missing are presumed to be trapped beneath the rubble. Experts say people trapped in such situations usually can survive only 72 hours because of dehydration, or early Friday in this case.    When asked whether the death toll could rise as high as 40,000, Sergio Piazzi, head of the European desk at the U.N. Office for the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs, said it was a possibility.    The official death toll now stands at more than 12,000.    Authorities considered pouring lime on mountains of rubble and roads crossing through hard-hit areas to prevent outbreaks of disease and stifle the stench of putrefying flesh.    Fearing typhoid fever, cholera or dysentery, officials have been spraying disinfectants and distributing water-purification tablets in some regions.    New fresh-water wells are to be dug in some areas, including the devastated seaside resort of Yalova, 30 miles south of Istanbul.    "So far, we have not seen any signs of cholera, typhoid or other infectious diseases in water or food. But we are taking every precaution we can. All water is being sterilized, and our priority at the moment is making sure that rubbish is collected and that toilets are sanitized," said Ibrahim Ustun, a doctor in Yalova. Problem with lime     Pouring lime would hamper crews from carrying out further searches, but rescues were becoming fewer and farther between as time passed.    Outside Yalova, Israeli teams saved a 10-year-old Israeli girl buried in the rubble of her family's summer house. An 11-year-old girl and a 95-year-old woman were rescued inside the town, and a French team pulled out two sisters, ages 19 and 10, in Golcuk with the help of Turkish volunteers. In Degirmendere, a 22-man Greek rescue team took 17 hours to rescue a 9-year-old boy.    Although there have been cases of people surviving for as long as 10 days trapped under rubble, most earthquake survivors are pulled out in the first 24 to 48 hours.    Turkey's semiofficial Anatolia News Agency reported that British and Dutch rescue teams were leaving places such as Adapazari province, where more than 3,000 people died and 5,000 were injured.    "The reason we came here was to save people. That has ended," the agency quoted Edward Pearne, head of a British rescue crew, as saying.    But as some left, two dozen specialists from Miami, Fla., arrived yesterday.    In an effort to speed up the operation, the government requisitioned rescue equipment, forklifts and hearses. Where was the army?     The Turkish army entered the rescue and cleanup effort yesterday after spending days on the sidelines. While it portrays itself as a quintessentially national institution ready to step in when the nation is in danger, the Turkish army has until now maintained a remarkably low profile, leaving the rescue effort to civilian agencies and foreign volunteers.    One newspaper quoted an unnamed government official as saying that civilian leaders "had coordination and communication problems with the military for 48 hours, which were resolved on Thursday." Another said the military "suffered huge logistical problems on the first day after the quake," but had since overcome them.    An official close to the military said commanders feared that thrusting themselves into the spotlight would give the impression that they were running Turkey. The commanders have played a decisive role in domestic politics over the last few years, and are sensitive to assertions that they are intruding into spheres where they do not belong.    About 50,000 soldiers are helping the 2,000 foreign specialists and have been overseeing aid distribution to prevent looting and a black market. According to local media, 30 people have been arrested for looting.    The assault ship USS Kearsarge was expected to arrive tomorrow. Fully staffed, the ship's hospital will have four operating rooms, 17 intensive-care beds, 47 general ward beds and provide medical assistance to 500 more.    Officials also were taking steps to deal with people left homeless across a 400-mile stretch from far northwestern Turkey to areas near Ankara, the capital. Thousands of tents     A total of 19,000 tents were set up in the more hard-hit areas.    Anatolia said a camp for 3,000 people will be set up in Yalova, while the Adapazari governor, Yener Rakicioglu, said another will be built to house 10,000 in his province. In Adapazari, home to 360,000 people, 70,000 homes have been demolished or rendered uninhabitable.    At least 20,000 more tents were needed, and the United Nations was planning to provide 70 percent of them, field officer Ziya Gokmen said.    At least 1,600 people were killed and 4,326 injured and more than 600 buildings were destroyed or made uninhabitable in Yalova, a popular vacation site for Turks and a weekend retreat for many residents of Bursa and Istanbul.    The government also sent four ferries to serve as accommodation for people who lost their homes.    Many of the homes that collapsed were constructed with substandard materials, provoking public outrage at builders and local authorities charged with enforcing codes.    Many people have put up their own makeshift tents - often blankets thrown over poles or twigs - in parks and other open spaces. Information from The New York Times is included in this report.Caption:  PHOTO: MAP1) AP: TURKEY (MAP NOT AVAILABLE ELECTRONICALLY)2) BURHAN OZBILICI / AP: QUAKE SURVIVORS ARE LIVING IN THESE TENTS IN  YALOVA, TURKEY. HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF PEOPLE WERE MADE HOMELESS BY  THE QUAKE.
