IZMIT, Turkey - Mobbing bus stations and jamming roads, panicked residents fled the center of Turkey's earthquake zone in the wake of the two strong jolts yesterday that rocked buildings weakened by a major quake  last month.    At least one person was killed. Many of the  dozens of people injured hurt themselves jumping from balconies and windows when yesterday's 5.2-magnitude tremor hit, followed by a 4.6-magnitude aftershock 20 minutes later.    Terrified customers at a bank in Izmit banged on windows they could not open. Children at a kindergarten set up in a tent city for quake victims shrieked, "It's moving! A new earthquake!"     The new tremor, like the 7.4-magnitude Aug. 17 earthquake, was centered in Izmit, a city of 300,000 on the Sea of Marmara.    Falling debris struck a 30-year-old man in Izmit, adding to a two-week death toll that has topped 14,400. Thousands are missing.     A full 16 days after the big quake, rescuers and the Turkish public were caught in the drama of yet another desperately hoped-for rescue today, when residents of the city of Golcuk, southeast of Istanbul, reported hearing people under rubble from the Aug. 17 quake.    Aid workers and soldiers with shovels ran up to the site, despite the extremely remote chance of finding anyone alive. Search dogs signaled there was someone beneath the rubble; at early afternoon doctors and nurses rushed to the scene with a stretcher.    Would-be rescuers kept digging into the night, hauling away the roof and then floor after floor. A new tremor late in the day frightened the search dogs, who ran from the rubble and had to be comforted by their trainers.    Yesterday's jolts caught some as they re-entered damaged homes. Seismologists said the tremors were aftershocks, which will persist for months, and they urged people to give up on salvaging belongings from wrecked homes.    After yesterday's tremors, many in Izmit and adjoining towns in the 200-mile-long quake zone were more than ready to get out.    "We just packed our bags and hit the road," said Cem Ergezer, filling up his gas tank to take his parents to the Aegean Coast. "That last quake frightened us very much."      Authorities sent 29 judges and prosecutors to the quake zone to compile evidence against contractors whose allegedly shoddy construction contributed to the high death toll.Caption:  PHOTOEYAL WARSHAVSKY / THE AP: EARTHQUAKE SURVIVORS COMFORT A WOMAN INJURED IN A STRONG AFTERSHOCK YESTERDAY IN IZMIT, TURKEY.
