The rest of the world just can't get it right, dyed-in-the-Calvin-Klein New Yorkers say. They have plenty of reasons for their egocentrism; starting with the skyline, ending with the pizza, and counting up everything in between, New York is arguably the heart of the world.     That's why it should have been such a pleasure to watch it be utterly destroyed, as the four-hour CBS miniseries "Aftershock: Earthquake in New York" promises. You want to see the haughty Lady Liberty take an unceremonious header into the bay. You want to see the New York that makes dour church ladies across the Bible Belt quote passages about Sodom and crumbling pillars of salt get its comeuppance.     But if you're going to film a disaster movie about New York, at least hire a few New Yorkers to show you how to do it. CBS apparently didn't think to do that, so for two hours starting at 9 p.m. Sunday, and two more on Tuesday, what we get, instead, is a New York City that fits on a soundstage in Los Angeles.     This is not John Gotti or Rudolph Giuliani's New York. It's not even Madonna's New York. For one thing, in "Aftershock's" version of New York, there are no discernible Italians. No Jews, either. This is a New York free of Puerto Ricans, Dominicans, Haitians, Cubans and drag queens. This is a New York without boroughs; Brooklyn? The Bronx? Harlem? What are they? Maybe that's why when disaster strikes, there's barely any looting.     All you'll find in "Aftershock's" New York are Tom Skerritt, Sharon Lawrence and Jennifer Garner, whose lips require their own time zone. Skerritt plays the resigned Fire Chief Thomas Ahearn, Garner is a lippy ballerina named Diane, and Lawrence is an agoraphobic California transplant and the mother of a son with a game leg. Yes, a whole lot of garden-variety white folks fill "Aftershock's" Manhattan.     I take that back - there's also four black people. Charles S. Dutton fills the miniseries' black civil-service job as Bruce Lincoln, the mayor of New York, and Cicely Tyson plays his mother, Emily. Lisa Nicole Carson takes time off as an "Ally McBeal" lawyer to play Lincoln's daughter Evie, also an attorney. Then there's Ray J, who portrays a hood rat named, I kid you not, Nonamey. Now, I might not be, as the young folks say, "down wit it." But the last time I checked, Nonamey wasn't a popular street alias.     To be fair, "Aftershock" isn't supposed to be a New York movie, it's a disaster flick. Even considering that, the thing fails miserably. Disaster movies excite us with the shake-ups; everything else is just icing. When you're planning a four-hour miniseries, the icing had better be good.     It's not. On the fateful day, Ahearn drops his Pert-haired daughter Christine (Kimberly Warnat) off at high school. Across the city, Evie has gotten a creepy guy acquitted in a murder trial, and gets on a subway with him. Emily and Nonamey are arguing in a church, and Diane (Garner) is taking a taxicab driven by an amorous Russian named Nicholai (Frederick Weller) when the whole city caves in on itself. That's the series' first half.     The second half finds Lawrence trekking through the streets in her weekend warrior gear, looking for her limping son at his school. Ahearn's kid is also trapped in her high school. Evie is dashing through a flooding subway with a psycho, while Emily and Nonamey are blocked into a church basement. Nicholai, Diane and Diane's lips are running through crumbling Manhattan streets to find Diane's parents, and honestly, who cares?      Nobody really wants to witness the intricacies of watching the mayor clear the rubble, or people navigate the subway, or see Nicholai coach Diane on survival. You'll be wishing the concrete would open up and swallow them all.     The quake itself is fun and cheesy as a David LaChappelle photo. You'll feel a distinct satisfaction seeing the smugly modern Guggenheim crack and crumble, like someone taking a hammer to an old meringue sculpture. The streets buckle, old brownstones tumble, bricks and plaster rain down from unbelievable heights to squash screaming pedestrians. Some of the most expensive real estate on the planet is reduced to so much pricey applesauce. As for the rest of it, "Aftershock" amounts to barely a tremor on the fun Richter scale. So I'm going to bestow one truly New York City thing upon this miniseries: I'm giving "Aftershock" the patented NYC one-finger salute. Take that, buddy. Melanie McFarland hopes never to have to use her Chicagoan sensibilities to survive an earthquake here. She can be reached at 206-464-2256 or by e-mail at mmcfarland@seattletimes.com.
