ISTANBUL, Turkey - Outside his neighborhood mosque, the old man leans forward to explain why secular Turkey was hit with a killer earthquake.    "God is punishing us," Fevzi Kisioglu says. "We've lost our way."     The sentiment is not uncommon among devout Muslims who survived the 7.4-magnitude temblor that struck Turkey on Aug. 17, killing more than 12,000 people and leaving many more homeless.    But it remains to be seen whether such piety - combined with public outrage at the government's post-quake fumbling - will translate into increased support for radical religious movements that Turkey's secular government and military have been seeking to suppress.    The quake hit the heartland of secular Turkey but has stoked religious fervor among some Turks looking for reason behind the random devastation.    A radical Islamic group, Hezbollah, smashed windows and bottles at a state-owned liquor store in Istanbul the day after the quake, blaming booze peddlers for bringing damnation on Turkey.    A construction worker blamed such things as the state's recent closing of religious schools, restrictions on Koranic courses and its ban on headscarves in public buildings.    "I believe God is punishing us because of that campaign," said the young man, who wouldn't give his name.    Former prime minister Necmettin Erbakan, the Islamist leader who was pressured out of office by the military in 1997 for violating the country's secular principles, called the quake a "divine warning."     So far, the Islamic Virtue Party, which sprang from the roots of Erbakan's banned movement, has been stressing cooperation with Prime Minister Bulent Ecevit's secular government.    The party captured 15 percent of the vote in April elections and is the third-largest group in Parliament.    A leading Virtue Party lawmaker, Lutfu Dogan, said in Parliament that all parties should be united in times of national emergency.    Yesterday, though, the party asked lawmakers to open an investigation into the government-affiliated Turkish Red Crescent, accusing it of not fulfilling its responsibilities in the wake of the quake.  Newspapers have accused the Red Crescent of spending lavishly on new offices while skimping on supplies of emergency tents, many of which aren't even waterproof. The Red Crescent has denied the charges.    Analysts expect Ecevit's 4-month-old government to survive the post-quake criticism.    "At the moment there's no overt attempt to capitalize on this," said Ilter Turan, a political scientist at Istanbul's Bilgi University. "Dissatisfaction with the slow way the government has responded has not yet turned into a political movement. People are still occupied with the urgency of the situation."     But others are predicting eventual political repercussions.    "The people, the voters, they are the best mechanism to evaluate this," said Kemal Usta, deputy mayor of the Istanbul suburb of Sultanbeyli, a Virtue Party stronghold. "We expect this government will not survive for long."     Virtue Party supporters have been mobilizing aid in the quake zone, following a model that helped build fundamentalist movements in other mostly Muslim countries.    The Virtue Party, though, takes pains to avoid the fundamentalist label, stressing its commitment to democracy. It has not received any donations from Islamic countries, according to Abdullah Gul, a senior Virtue Party lawmaker.    The party holds the mayor's office in Istanbul, Turkey's most Westernized city, a post it won in 1994 by wooing poor laborers who flocked from the countryside looking for work. They were also the ones hardest hit by the earthquake, which hardly touched central Istanbul.    Within days, the party plastered posters around Istanbul's poor outskirts showing the crescent moon of Turkey's flag - plus a heart - and a reassuring message for the shaken populace: "Let's heal the wounds together."     In one hard-hit neighborhood, Avcilar, where some 10,000 people were left homeless, the party is distributing hot meals to people living in tents, arranging medical care for the injured and trying to arrange temporary housing in empty college dormitories, said Sahin Yavuz, a local party leader.    Hulya Bulaca, a 34-year-old hairdresser, has been living in a tent with six others for a week. Dressed stylishly in black, she says she's grateful for the meals the Virtue Party has provided, but has no intention of switching her allegiance from Ecevit's liberal Democratic Left.    A short distance away, 36-year-old Semaka Uzun, wearing a Muslim headscarf, tends to her three children, ages 4, 10 and 15, and tries to stay warm and dry in a blue-and-orange tent loaned by a neighbor.    "We don't think about political parties any more," she said. "We are thinking about ourselves."Caption:  PHOTOFIKRET AY / THE AP: RELATIVES OF MUSTAFA KARAKOC, A MEMBER OF THE TURKISH NAVY WHO DIED IN THE EARTHQUAKE, MOURN DURING A FUNERAL CEREMONY IN IZMIR YESTERDAY.
