BOGOTA, Colombia - Attorney General Janet Reno toured a camp for refugees from Colombia's catastrophic earthquake and met with justice officials yesterday, opening a two-day trip to the world's top cocaine-producing nation.    Accompanied by first lady Nohra Pastrana, Reno visited refugees in Armenia, the western city that was hardest hit by the Jan. 25 earthquake, which killed at least 1,171 people and left 250,000 homeless.    At a soccer stadium where 120 families are living in tents, Reno, wearing a straw hat to block a strong sun, praised quake victims' courage and said the United States hoped to increase its $10 million aid commitment to the stricken region.    "It's magnificent what people are able to do in these situations," said Reno, before returning to the capital, Bogota, where she was scheduled to meet with President Andres Pastrana.    She also met with chief prosecutor Alfonso Gomez and National Police director Gen. Rosso Jose Serrano. Afterward, she called Colombia "a great country" and praised the work of its police force in combating drugs.    On the eve of her visit, police in Bogota on Tuesday captured Armando Pedraza, 40, a suspected heroin trafficker wanted by authorities in Italy and Switzerland.    Relations with Washington were acrimonious during the administration of former President Ernesto Samper, who left office last year. Outraged over a $6 million contribution from the Cali drug cartel to Samper's 1994 campaign, the Clinton administration revoked the president's visa and twice "decertified" Colombia as a drug-war ally.    Relations have warmed under Pastrana, who has visited President Clinton at the White House twice since his election.    Confirming the improved ties, Washington last week fully certified Colombia's anti-narcotics cooperation last year despite a more than 25 percent increase in the country's production of coca, the raw ingredient for cocaine.    A key issue that could cause rifts between the governments is whether Colombia will agree to extradite alleged drug traffickers wanted by U.S. prosecutors for bringing cocaine and heroin into the United States.    Four drug suspects have been captured since last year on requests by the United States, however their extradition must be approved by the Colombian government and Supreme Court, said Gomez.Caption:  PHOTOAP: ATTORNEY GENERAL JANET RENO TOURS A CAMP FOR EARTHQUAKE VICTIMS IN ARMENIA, COLOMBIA.
