JAKARTA, Indonesia - A powerful earthquake and dozens of strong aftershocks struck the Indonesian island of Sumatra, killing at least 58 people, injuring hundreds and leaving thousands homeless, authorities said today.     In Bengkulu, the hardest-hit city, people dug through the rubble of ruined buildings in search of bodies and trapped survivors.     The Indonesian Meteorological and Geophysical Service said the quake, measuring magnitude 7.3, hit at 11:29 p.m. yesterday and was centered beneath the Indian Ocean, about 60 west of Bengkulu, which has a population of 1.2 million. The U.S. Geological Survey in Golden, Colo., estimated the quake's strength at 7.9.     Almost 500 people had been reported injured, 255 seriously.     The death toll was expected to rise as volunteers and emergency workers search ruined buildings.     "Many houses have collapsed and the walls on bigger buildings have been fractured. I helped save three of my neighbors who were trapped under rubble," said Edy, a resident of Bengkulu, a city of about 1.2 million some 60 miles east of the quake's epicenter.     The quake lasted several minutes and shook a wide area. A magnitude 6 aftershock hit 11 minutes afterward, and 53 smaller tremors were recorded before 6 a.m. today, frightening residents and hampering rescue efforts,  seismologists said.     Rescue efforts before sunrise were hampered by widespread electricity and telephone outages. Thousands fled their homes as  aftershocks continued.     Bengkulu police Sgt. Hariyono said by telephone that many more people were reported injured in demolished houses.     "The quake went on for many minutes. Dozens of homes have been destroyed, and almost all houses and buildings in the city seem to have been damaged," Hariyono said.     Doctors in Bengkulu treated the injured in the open, fearing aftershocks might bring down the state hospital, the  Antara news agency reported. Damage also was reported at Bengkulu Airport.     The quake was felt across much of western half of the archipelago nation and the neighboring island state of Singapore.     The U.S. Geological Survey said the quake's epicenter was about 20 1/2 miles beneath the floor of the Indian Ocean - very shallow in geological terms.Caption:  MAPThe Seattle Times: Poersful eathquake, Indonesia (map not available electronically)
