MERCER ISLAND      When Mercer Island  officials decided to check the city's  water-supply system to make sure the huge old tanks could hold up when the dreaded big earthquake hit, they didn't know what to expect.      What they found wasn't terrifying, but it was of concern. The welds were suspect and might crack under duress, and old, cracking - and in some places missing - lining made of aging coal-tar resin posed  health concerns.      Now, after four months of work and $1.6 million - mostly in federal grants - Islanders can be more certain that when the big one hits, they won't go thirsty.      "The reservoirs weren't in a condition that they were going to fall down or collapse (on their own) or anything," said Patrick Yamashita, the city engineer. "But they weren't ready for a seismic event. Now we have a safe reservoir that isn't going to collapse and flood out the surrounding neighborhoods."      The first of the twin tanks, low-rising green plugs that hold 4 million gallons of water each, was built in 1962. The second followed 12 years later.      They hold water the island buys from  Seattle's Cedar River watershed.     Because the tanks are made of steel, they have to be lined to keep from rusting out.  Resin was peeling away      But when inspectors opened the tanks last year, they found the thick coal-tar resin coatings peeling away. The ceiling of the older tank wasn't lined at all any more.      "It was at the end of  its useful life," Yamashita said. "And there are better products out there."      Coal-tar products have raised concerns in recent years because heavy, prolonged exposure to certain other types of coal tar, especially creosote, has been linked to cancer.      But any worries that the city's water supply was tainted would be unfounded, experts said.      Coal-tar resin, commonly used for decades, doesn't leach into the water and is still approved for use in water-supply systems, said John Wilbur, an engineer with the American Water Works Association in Denver, which sets standards for public-water quality.      The Seattle Water Department still has coal-tar linings in seven of its 16 water tanks, said D'Anne Mount, department spokeswoman.      Still, the cracked, black coal-tar coating meant water was contacting the metal, potentially rusting it. So it had to go.      The new coating is a modern epoxy that is designed for potable-water tanks. It's also bright white, which means it helps illuminate the tanks during  maintenance.      "It was like a cave in there," said Brian Platt, a Bothell engineer for RH2 Engineering who designed the renovation. "With the new coating, even with only one hatch open, it's so bright you can see everything."  Seams strengthened      Meanwhile, every seam was strengthened by another layer of steel, Platt said. The tanks got a fresh coat of green paint on the outside. The ladders were redesigned for safety, and metal doors were installed to thwart vandals.      And even the adjoining pump station received seismic upgrades, such as making sure the pipes are secure and the control boxes don't topple in a temblor.      Of the $1.6 million cost, the Federal Emergency Management Agency is picking up about $1.1 million, Yamashita said.      And that means ratepayers won't see any increases on their bill, while they will know the water supply is reliable.      "It's not a glamorous project, but it sure is important," Yamashita said.  Ian Ith's phone message number is 206-464-2109. His e-mail address is iith@seattletimes.comCaption:  PHOTOMark Harrison / The Seattle Times: A worker removes sand that was used to sandblast the interior of a Mercer Island water tank. The Federal Emergency Management Agency will pay most of the project's cost.Patrick Yamashita
