SAN DIEGO - Geologists are predicting an unlikely scenario for the normally placid waters of Lake Tahoe. It's possible, they say, that an earthquake could generate 30-foot-high tsunami waves and inundate many areas near the shore.     The report, presented last month at an annual meeting of seismologists, is based on a new analysis of two faults directly beneath the lake on the California-Nevada border. They now are thought capable of generating earthquakes as large as the 7.1-magnitude quake that hit Turkey in November.     The faults were long inaccessible to geologists because they are under more than 1,000 feet of water, but recently were mapped accurately with sonar.     Computer modeling by a group at the University of Nevada, Reno, that is working with a Japanese tsunami expert showed ruptures along either fault could lift or drop the bottom of the lake and generate a tsunami. The tsunami in turn could trigger seiche waves - massive sloshing that could crisscross the lake, persist for hours and reach heights of 30 feet or more.     "It was surprising to me the wave heights were that high," said Gene Ichinose, a University of Nevada graduate student in geophysics and lead author of the report. Although tsunamis normally are associated with oceans, Tahoe is the 10th-deepest lake in the world, more than 1,500 feet in places.     While the study is causing some to give new thought to the hazards that earthquakes pose to inland bodies of water,  it should be no cause for panic, experts said.     "If you have a lakeshore house, you shouldn't sell it," said David Schwartz, chief of the U.S. Geological Survey's San Francisco Bay Area Earthquake Hazards Project. The study's authors estimate the risk of a magnitude-7 quake under Lake Tahoe in the next 50 years to be between 3 percent and 4 percent, far less than perennial dangers from forest fires and floods.     Nevertheless, the study indicates that the area now may face an additional hazard. "At this point, what we have in Lake Tahoe is a distinctly valid hypothesis, and it's worrisome," said Craig dePolo, a geologist with the Nevada Bureau of Mines and Geology.     "For now, people can treat it as an interesting story, but they should keep in mind if they feel a large earthquake in Lake Tahoe, they should first duck and cover and then sprint 30 feet in elevation."     The closest analogy comes from a magnitude-7.5 earthquake that hit Hebgen Lake in Montana, near Yellowstone National Park, on Aug. 17, 1959.     Witnesses saw "a tsunami and waves that sloshed back and forth for hours that were five or six feet in height," said Bob Smith, a University of Utah geophysics professor.     The waves threatened but did not take out Hebgen Dam. Most damage at Hebgen Lake and nine deaths were attributed to an 85-million-ton landslide that poured onto a campground and into a river. The landslide itself triggered 30-foot waves, Smith said.     Another area Smith studies, the Great Salt Lake, also could be affected by earthquakes on the nearby Wasatch fault. Tsunamis and seiche waves are not a concern because the lake is relatively shallow, but flooding of sections of Salt Lake City caused by sinking of the lake bed after an earthquake remains a worry.     Fears of tsunamis and seiche waves at Lake Tahoe previously had been quietly raised, because of worries that the waves could overtop and wash out Lake Tahoe Dam in Tahoe City. A U.S. Bureau of Reclamation study in the late 1980s predicted earthquake-generated waves of about 10 feet and led to improvements at the dam.     The new study is more precise because it uses a detailed sonar map of the lake's bottom created in 1998. That map shows that faults under Lake Tahoe have moved considerably in the past and therefore are capable of generating earthquakes of at least magnitude 7.     The map also showed evidence of a landslide that tumbled from the Homewood area across the lake on the Nevada side. "That would have been one heck of an event," said John  Anderson, who heads the University of Nevada's seismology lab and was a co-author of the paper, published  in the journal Geophysical Research Letters.     Nevada Bureau of Mines and Geology's dePolo, meanwhile, is hoping to unearth traces of any prehistoric tsunamis - errant sand deposits underneath today's forests. He says they would help accurately assess the risk of tsunamis in Tahoe and lead to better disaster preparedness.     There is an analogous story in the Pacific Northwest, where USGS geologist Brian Atwater, investigating Indian myths of massive earthquakes and tsunamis, found evidence for both. He even pinpointed the catastrophic event to Jan. 26, 1700, with the help of Japanese tsunami expert Kenji Satake, who also is a co-author of the new Lake Tahoe study. The work in Seattle led to the development of a tsunami warning system in the Pacific Northwest.     When tsunamis cross the ocean, geologists often can give hours or even days of warning. But in Tahoe, models show, the large waves could be generated in seconds.     "If people feel a really strong earthquake, they don't have a lot of time," said Anderson, who stressed that people should be most worried about moving to higher ground if they experience very strong shaking that lasts more than 10 seconds. "It would be information they would not be able to miss."Caption:  PHOTO, MAPThe Los Angeles Times: The big wave (map not available electronically)Jim Grant / Tahoe Daily Tribune: Geologists say an earthquake could generate 30-foot-high tsunami waves at Lake Tahoe.
