SAN DIEGO - In the name of engineering, researchers did their destructive best  yesterday to simulate what happened in 1994 when the earth shook much of Southern California, killing 60 people and causing $40 billion in damage.     At the end of the unprecedented "shake test," researchers confirmed their hypothesis that the modern home is a safe place, structurally, even in violent earthquakes - but that furnishings inside can be killers when they start tumbling and toppling.     "The minimal structural damage is the good news," said Frieder Seible, professor of engineering at the University of California at San Diego (USDC). "But things that aren't tied down go flying everywhere."     For 20 brutal seconds, a two-story wood-frame structure built at the UCSD engineering department was jolted on a moving platform with the force of the 6.7 temblor that struck with its epicenter near Northridge.     With the exception of a few minor cracks in the exterior, the 600-square-foot structure, built to 1997 standards, was unscathed.      Researchers  noted that older homes, particularly those built before seismic standards were toughened, might not fare as well.     If there was a surprise, it was that the test home's stucco exterior seemed to absorb some of the mock quake's energy and keep it from reaching the plywood and drywall within, helping to minimize damage.     Inside the home, effects of the quake were more evident: A metal cabinet and an  unstrapped water heater toppled to the floor. Framed pictures, books, trophies, two televisions and a stereo system crashed loudly. Flower pots were smashed.     Chandeliers swayed and jumped up and down. A stereo speaker crashed onto a child-size bed.     The test was conducted on a 4.8-ton platform known as a shake table, one of several at UCSD where bridge and freeway designs are also tested.     Three hundred sensors and six cameras were placed inside the test structure to see how individual parts reacted to the stress.     Although there have been other tests under the $7 million project funded by the federal and state government in the wake of the Northridge quake, this was the first with the test structure fully furnished and the stucco exterior applied.     Engineers have experimented extensively with high-rises, freeway pylons, bridges and other steel and concrete construction, said Robert Reitherman, executive director of the California Universities for Research in Earthquake Engineering, the coalition that is conducting the research.     But wood-frame structures, which are generally more flexible and survive earthquakes better than concrete or steel structures, have been largely ignored in studies of seismic damage - even though most structures in the United States are of wood construction, including 99 percent of California homes.     The tests are meant to assist in improving building codes and standards, making insurance ratings and loss estimates more accurate, and possibly assisting in the development of standards for retrofitting older structures.
