TACOMA - New data show a major fault could run for 30 miles from Hood Canal to Tacoma, and based on its size it could produce an earthquake to rival the one that killed 63 people in San Francisco in 1989, a scientist says.    "You basically could have an earthquake like that pretty close to Tacoma, which would be extremely damaging," said Tom Brocher, a U.S. Geological Survey geophysicist and the most outspoken believer that new studies prove the fault's existence.     "I'm calling it a fault," he said. "I don't see what else it could be."     Others call the data persuasive but say proof of the fault's existence is not conclusive.     "There may not be enough evidence to indict, but there is certainly enough to convene a grand jury," said Craig Weaver, who heads the Geological Survey's earthquake-hazards program in Washington.    The data, released in the past few weeks, came from tests conducted two years ago when scientists set sail through Puget Sound on a research ship equipped with air guns that set off booms used to probe the region's rocks in much the same way ultrasound is used to view a fetus.     Images from the study show Tacoma sitting in a massive geologic basin, or a scooped-out area in the volcanic rocks that make up the Puget Sound bedrock.     A similar Seattle fault and basin were uncovered by the same shipboard tests, in addition to subsequent planned explosions and recordings.   The Seattle fault stretches from Bremerton and  Bainbridge Island through Seattle to Issaquah. It is believed to be capable of producing at least a magnitude-7 earthquake, which would be slightly larger than the Loma Prieta earthquake that rocked San Francisco.     Even if the Tacoma fault is as extensive as it appears, geologists do not know how likely it is to produce earthquakes. But it has gotten the attention of local officials.     "It does ratchet things up," said Steve Bailey, Pierce County's emergency-management chief. "We've had earthquakes in Tacoma . . . but the Tacoma fault highlights that we have a greater problem than we thought we had."     Tacoma was jolted by a magnitude-7.1 earthquake in 1949 and one of magnitude 6.5 in 1965. But they originated deep in the Earth's crust, and they had weakened in power by the time they reached the surface.    The presumed Tacoma fault is shallower, and quakes  along it likely would be more destructive.
