I was shocked at your article "Earthquake Alert" (Sunday Punch, March 26). How dare you compare San Francisco earthquake survival to Seattle rain survival? If this is an attempt at humor, your funny bone is in the wrong place. When Seattle rain can come even close to the devastation of the last   San Francisco earthquake, you might just be able to call yourself a survivor.      I know, I was there. I worked at the fallen freeway where many people lost their lives and families literally crushed between 6 to 18 inches of space    between tons of concrete. I was there to assist the rescue workers consisting of the military, police and citizens with the horrible task of recovering bodies and looking for survivors. We all witnessed the bravery of the little 8-year-old girl whose legs were crushed under her dead mother's car seat in a space so tight rescuers could barely reach her. We all prayed and cried in anguish as her legs had to be amputated to remove her from the smashed vehicle totally unable to use any anesthesia on her.      There are hundreds of stories just like that one. I will never forget the Army personnel who told me the freeway collapse alone was worse than they had ever seen in  war. That kind of death is indescribable. I wonder how your "friend" Mrs. Johnston feels about your article. She has every right to have the face of     fear when the word earthquake is mentioned - especially joked about.      The survivors of that terrible quake  are people of all walks of life who   worked together to assist in any way they could for as long as it took to do   so. From the skilled military and police to the average citizen and even the punk rocker with green hair who assisted a policeman direct traffic in a fallen and burning city - with no regard to his own safety. Fire, falling debris and fear did not sway that young man or any other. A sight I will not forget. And cheers go to the retired poorOakland man who came running with a ladder to the fallen freeway to help. With police trying to dissuade him, concerned for his safety and the gruesome sight of the deaths there, all he could say to them was "I ain't got a thing to my name but these strong arms and I am going to help!" Cheers surrounded him.      I am a native Seattle resident who just happened to live in the Bay Area for nearly 5 years and I must admit that Californians have courage and grit you will never know. I have lived here for over 45 years and I know and believe   that Seattle would come together just as bravely as the San Franciscans did if an earthquake should be so devastating here. I hope you never know that kind of earthquake, but if you do find yourself in one, just don't hide under your friend's umbrella.  Rita Whalen  Freeland, Whidbey Island
