SAN FRANCISCO - Bessie Shum doesn't remember the day San Francisco came crashing down in a roar of dusty death. She was only 2.     For years, San Francisco didn't remember her pain either; official lists of the earthquake dead list fewer than 12 Chinese names, even though hundreds are believed to have died in the crowded apartment houses of Chinatown.     Today, organizers of the 94th annual memorial of the San Francisco earthquake of 1906 hope to take a step toward recognizing the victims time forgot.     "It's time that we find and make people aware that the Chinese were here," says Gladys Hansen, city archivist emeritus and curator of the Museum of the City of San Francisco.     Although she was too young to remember the Great Quake firsthand, Shum vividly recalls the stories her parents told: how they dashed out of their one-room flat in Chinatown, her mother in the arms of her husband, baby Bessie carried by a neighbor.     "My mother had bound feet; she couldn't walk too good," Shum says. She throws up her slender hands to describe the flight from Chinatown's rickety hazards: "No time to pack! Just grabbed diapers!"     No one knows how many Chinese died in the 1906 earthquake. Hansen believes that the overall death toll was vastly undercounted. At the time, officials gave totals of 478 to 498, and for decades afterward the figure 700 was used. But her research puts the toll at no less than 3,000.     Hansen, who arrived at her figure by going  through letters, newspapers and other sources from the time, blames the low count on the confusion, the fact that many died elsewhere after being evacuated, fierce fires that turned bodies to cinder and a general apathy toward the poor and minorities. "It wasn't just the Chinese. There were signs all over, `No Irish, no blacks, no Chinese need apply.' They got away with this," Hansen says.     After Chinatown was flattened by the earthquake, civic leaders eager to move in on the valuable downtown property decided to push the Chinese to the city's outskirts.     But the community had other ideas.     Chinese-American merchant Look Tin Eli hired two architects to design his destroyed bazaar. They gave traditional Western motifs an Eastern flair, creating pagoda-style details that laid the groundwork for modern-day Chinatown, a popular tourist spot 90 years later.     At 96, Shum still lives in Chinatown, on a street so steep you have to bend your knees to walk up it.     She is looking forward to getting up before dawn today to gather for the 5:13 a.m. ceremony at Lotta's Fountain, a post-earthquake gathering spot in 1906 and every anniversary since. There, as always, participants will remember the dead with silence, a wreath and then the wail of police and fire sirens.     "I have been looking for a Chinese survivor for a really long time," says event organizer Taren Sapienza. Shum was found after Sapienza went to Mayor Willie Brown and he called in his liaison to the Chinese-American community.Caption:  PHOTOEric Risberg / The Associated Press: Bessie Shum, 96, survivor of the 1906 San Francisco earthquake, plans to attend today's ceremony that commemorates those who died.
