Harborview Medical Center administrators waved a red flag at the public last month, saying the hospital's buildings are so old and unstable a moderate earthquake would paralyze the region's largest trauma center.      But a $257 million project administrators are selling as a desperately needed seismic retrofitting began as a plan to expand the hospital. And Harborview officials presented it that way until they went before the Metropolitan King County Council two weeks ago.       Only then did the risk of damage from an earthquake become the primary issue, when Harborview's chief executive briefed the council on the project.       "If the big one hits, we're in deep trouble," Executive Director David Jaffee told the council March 20. "The urgency and the timing are critical to the safety of the citizens of the entire county."    But records and interviews suggest the Seattle hospital is using fear as a sales tool.     "The seismic upgrade is the spin Harborview management is putting on the project to sell it to the public," said John Dolan, chairman of a citizens advisory board appointed by the city to represent the First Hill neighborhood.     In public hearings last fall, records show, the project manager told Dolan's community group that demand for medical services during the next decade was the primary reason for the project.     "The first objective for us was to meet essential patient-care needs," Elise Chayet, Harborview's director of planning  and regulatory affairs, said at the time.    Adding three buildings to Harborview's campus, she said, would allow the hospital to expand and provide "a secondary benefit" of seismic support.      In contrast to Jaffee's dire earthquake-risk plea, Harborview officials previously gave assurances that a moderate earthquake would not shut down emergency operations because the main trauma-treatment center was new.       Statements made by Harborview's emergency-medical director, Dr. Michael Copass, and media spokesman Larry Zalin in early March came in response to questions as to whether the state should allow other hospitals in King County to treat more trauma patients. Critics assert the lack of backup for the kind and volume of trauma services Harborview provides could leave the county vulnerable during a major disaster.       At the time, Copass and Zalin said that capacity was not a problem and that the newly constructed trauma center could withstand an earthquake and continue functioning. Patients Harborview couldn't handle, they said, could be treated at other hospitals.      Seven other hospitals provide trauma care to King County residents, but under state laws, paramedics must bring the most seriously injured to Harborview, which also receives patients from elsewhere in Washington and the Northwest.      Owned by King County but managed by the University of Washington, Harborview has operated in the black for more than seven years and enjoys a state-sanctioned monopoly in the treatment of the most seriously injured victims of gunshot wounds, falls, car accidents and other traumatic events.     Experts hired by Harborview say a moderate quake would damage portions of the hospital, which sits atop First Hill, overlooking the imploded Kingdome and the Seattle fault, which runs just south of it.     The two buildings scheduled for  demolition - Harborview Hall and the East Clinic - are the most vulnerable, according to the hospital's seismic experts. Harborview Hall, which houses labs and office space, was built in 1929. The East Clinic was built of concrete block in 1952 and houses outpatient clinics, including those for HIV and tuberculosis.     The North Wing, built in 1972, probably would survive a moderate quake but might not be operational afterward, according to a 1996 analysis commissioned by the hospital. That building contains intensive-care beds for adults and children, specialty services such as burn care, and orthopedics and cardiac care.      Most of the trauma operations are in the West Hospital, an addition completed in 1998.     Dr. Scott Barnhart, medical director, said looking at individual buildings misses the point: The hospital is an integrated facility, and anything that damages one part damages the whole. Patients treated in the trauma center often require intensive-care and specialty centers, such as orthopedics or burn treatment, that might not be available after a quake.     Barnhart said the proposed project is "70 percent seismically related."     "What we're talking about is very modest growth, and the need is substantiated," he said.      Hospital officials want the county to sell $157 million in bonds to help finance the project, though they have yet to make a formal request. The issue would have to be approved by voters, and Harborview's board of directors suggested it wants a vote this year.     But county consultants reviewing the plan and some County Council members question whether it represents the best, most economical option for fixing some buildings and serving the community's medical needs.       In a report published in August, an accounting consultant hired by the county executive questioned whether taxpayers should pay to add beds to Harborview when other nearby hospitals have beds available.     "Harborview is clearly the best-qualified facility to serve trauma and burn patients. . . . However, the fundamental question that should be considered is whether Harborview should be the only provider for patients requiring services that can be provided in other area hospitals or by other providers," the consultant, Don Hansen of Moss-Adams  wrote.     Even with the added beds, Hansen wrote, Harborview would be at capacity a year after the project's completion and would need 14 more beds by 2010 and 45 beds by 2015 if its operations were not changed.      County Council members also are scrutinizing the scope of the project. Chris Vance, R-Kent, said the council could choose to pay for the project in pieces.      "We could say, OK, let's do what needs to be done to the trauma center, but do we need to do all this to Harborview Hall?"       Other options for seismic retrofitting would be less expensive. For example, just strengthening the North Wing's walls, one of the options considered, would cost about $12.4 million. Instead, Harborview officials want to buttress the North Wing by connecting it with a bridge to a new, stronger building to the east, at a cost of $79.4 million. The North Wing would still need $11.8 million to make it earthquake-safe.      Chayet, Harborview's planning director, said the decision on how to strengthen the North Wing was not based on economics but on safety and the ability to add space. She said the buttress option would add 50 beds and would keep the wing open during construction.      Chayet said that although the buildings scheduled for replacement are not involved in emergency services, the hospital couldn't afford to have injured employees or doctors, nor streets blocked by rubble after an earthquake.      Harborview  has the support of some key council members and the county executive, but officials have asked the hospital to scale back the plan and consider putting it to a vote next year instead of this fall.      "We think their concerns are extremely legitimate," said Elaine Kraft, spokeswoman for County Executive Ron Sims. "They are doing what they need to do to ensure their vision for the hospital."       Sims' office has asked Harborview officials to trim their $157 million tentative bond request to about $102 million and wait a year, though Sims has not made a final recommendation.      Vance said the council sees Harborview's request for what it is: an expansion that also would strengthen an older building against earthquakes.      "I think they are spinning it a little bit, but they are not lying," Vance said. He compared Harborview's request to getting a really expensive bill for car repair. You may not agree, and you may secretly not trust the mechanic, he said. But in the end, there is no choice.     "You hate to spend the money on that, but you know you gotta have a car," he said. "What choice do you have? It's hard to say no to Harborview hospital."  Roberto Sanchez's phone message number is 206-464-8522. His e-mail address is rsanchez@seattletimes.com  Susan Kelleher's phone message number is 206-464-2508. Her e-mail address is skelleher@seattletimes.comCaption:  MAP, PHOTOTom Reese / The Seattle Times: Administrators at Harborview Medical Center, the tall building in the center, say the hospital needs retrofitting to make it earthquake safe.The Seattle Times: Proposed Harborview Medical Center improvements (map not available electronically)
