BALIKESIR AIR BASE, Turkey--For decades, Turkish warplanes have fought high-speed mock dogfights against Greek jets flying over disputed territory, a show of strength that each side used to intimidate the other and hone battle skills. Yesterday, the Turkish air force carried out a new mission--welcoming the first Greek warplanes to visit a Turkish air base in at least three decades. The visit is part of a remarkable thaw in Turkish-Greek relations that began last year, when both sides sent aid to each other following devastating earthquakes. Six gray and blue Greek F-16 warplanes touched down at Balikesir in northwest Turkey, the country's main air base facing Greece. The 8-year-old daughter of a Turkish pilot welcomed Greek commander Lt. Col. George Vlassopoulos with a bouquet of flowers. Vlassopoulos thanked her with a kiss on each cheek. The Greek warplanes came to Turkey to join NATO's Destined Glory-2000 exercises, which begin tomorrow and will involve some 21,000 soldiers and sailors from seven countries: Greece, Turkey, the United States, Britain, Germany, Spain and Italy. For decades, aircraft from Balikesir patrolled disputed regions of the Aegean Sea, occasionally engaging in mock dogfights with Greek aircraft patrolling the same area. Top Greek and Turkish officials have been talking throughout the year about ways to reduce tensions. Although few steps have been taken to resolve the territorial disputes that brought the two sides to the  brink of war three times in 26 years, the change is remarkable. Defense ministers from the rival countries met in Greece for the first time Tuesday and discussed how to cut military spending. The two NATO members have the most powerful militaries in the region. Turkey has plans to boost its military capability, in part to counter expected threats from eastern and southern neighbors Iraq, Iran and Syria. Turkey expects to spend $150 billion over 25 years on weapons such as tanks, attack helicopters and jet fighters. Greece, which regards Turkey as its main threat, has signed weapons contracts worth some $8 billion during the past three years.
