OKAYAMA, Japan--The powerful 7.3-magnitude earthquake that jolted a wide swath of Japan's hilly southwest yesterday injured dozens of people, knocked boulders down hillsides and threw groceries off supermarket shelves. The midday quake--the country's strongest in at least five years--caught many Japanese at work, where they clutched desks as office buildings rumbled and hanging lamps swung violently. Japan's National Police said 39 people were injured in the quake, which was centered 315 miles southwest of Tokyo. There were no reports that any injury was life-threatening. A bridge collapsed and was washed away in Okayama, also western Japan, and landslides were reported in 25 locations in the region. Nine houses were destroyed and 239 others damaged, police said. Nearly 2,500 had evacuated their homes, either because of damage or in fear of aftershocks. The damage was dramatic: Boulders rolled down a mountain and flattened the front of a car; streets buckled under the quake's force; wooden houses collapsed under the weight of their tile roofs. The light human toll of the quake was a sharp contrast with the devastation that a 7.2-magnitude quake in 1995 wrought in Kobe city, where 6,425 were killed and 250,000 homes destroyed. Yesterday's quake struck a largely rural area.       Priest gets 18 years in prison for raping children in his care CAEN, France--A French court sentenced a Catholic priest to 18 years in prison yesterday for raping and  molesting teenagers and children entrusted to his care. The Rev. Rene Bissey, 56, former abbot of Caen and Mondeville parishes in Normandy, had been formally charged in 1998 with raping and sexually abusing 11 boys. He has confessed to the charges. At the close of the five-day trial in Caen, Bissey asked his victims for forgiveness. "Thanks to prison and doctors, I realized that I was a criminal," said Bissey, who has served some jail time on charges. "I'm asking forgiveness for what I have done from the children and the families of the children who are here." On Thursday, psychiatrist Dr. Louis Anne testified Bissey displayed a "total lack of morality or sense of guilt ... and a total indifference toward his victims." Bishop Pierre Pican, who was placed under investigation for reportedly ignoring signs of Bissey's pedophilia, testified Wednesday but refused to discuss any prior knowledge of the crimes.       Argentine official quits; government coalition shaken BUENOS AIRES -- Argentine Vice President Carlos Alvarez, who heads one of the two parties in the ruling Alliance coalition, resigned yesterday in apparent anger over changes in the Cabinet, throwing the coalition into crisis. The popular 51-year-old politician had called for heads to roll in President Fernando de la Rua's 10-month-old government over a major bribery scandal in the Senate. He also had criticized failed attempts to end more than two years' of economic stagnation. But when De la Rua changed half his Cabinet on Thursday, he confirmed or promoted officials suspected of paying bribes and strengthened Economy Minister Jose Luis Machinea. Social Action Minister Graciela Fernandez Meijide said: "The vice president took the decision last night. Then he spoke with the president." "He's the most honest guy in the government and they have got rid of him," said a gray-haired man outside Alvarez's home. "That seems to be Argentina's destiny." Ministers sought to give assurances that the Alliance would not collapse. Alvarez had asked "all men and women in the Frepaso not to quit and said he will keep working for the Alliance from the outside," said Fernandez Meijide, a Frepaso member.       6 die when Mexican plane overshoots runway in storm MEXICO CITY--An Aeromexico plane carrying 83 passengers ran off a runway in northern Mexico during a rainstorm yesterday, smashing into homes and cars before skidding into a canal. At least six people were killed on the ground. At least 60 of the passengers and four crew members suffered scrapes and bruises on the flight from Mexico City to Reynosa, just across the border from McAllen, Texas. A 39-year-old woman and her three children, ages 1, 3 and 5, were killed when the plane slammed into their home. Two people walking near a drainage canal were killed when the plane plowed into them.       Blasts kill 2, injure 22 in area bordering Chechnya MOSCOW--A series of explosions killed two people and wounded 22 others yesterday in the southern Russian region of Stavropol. The first two explosions went off within minutes of each other at a train station in the city of Pyatigorsk, killing a woman and injuring three other people, said Viktor Beltsov, a spokesman with the Emergency Situations Ministry. Shortly afterward, two more explosions occurred in the city of Nevinnomyssk, killing one person and injuring 19, officials said. The first blast ripped through a bus stop across from the city administration building and the second detonated at a market, Beltsov said. It was not clear what caused the explosions and there was no claim of responsibility. Stavropol borders Russia's Chechnya region, where Russian forces are battling Islamic rebels. Police have blamed the rebels for several market and apartment building bombings that have killed scores of people in the past year.       Ex-prime minister barred from running for president ABIDJAN, Ivory Coast -- Ivory Coast's supreme court yesterday barred former Prime Minister Alassane Ouattara from running in its Oct. 22 presidential election to return the country to civilian rule. Court President Tia Kone, reading his ruling on state radio and television, said that Ouattara did not fulfill the nationality conditions required of candidates under a new constitution approved overwhelmingly in a July referendum. Opponents of Ouattara, who draws most of his support from the Muslim north, say that he is a national of neighboring Burkina Faso. The court approved the candidacies of military ruler Gen. Robert Guei, who was installed by soldiers who staged the cocoa-producing country's first coup in December 1999, and of veteran Socialist Laurent Gbagbo, but barred former Interior Minister Emile Constant Bombet, the candidate of the ousted ruling Democratic Party on the grounds that he was subject of a legal investigation.       Oil spill damages water for Peruvians in jungle LIMA -- Some 10,000 inhabitants of Peru's remote northern jungle are at risk from pollution after a boat operated by an Argentine company was involved in a collision, spilling 210,000 gallons of oil into the River Maranon, a tributary of the Amazon, civil-protection officials said yesterday. "Some 10,000 people are affected with problems watering their crops, drinking water and fishing; these are very isolated communities that live from agriculture and fishing," said Gustavo Bobio, head of the civil-defense institute in Loreto province. He said the spill had spread 50 miles downstream, affecting 41 native communities. Villagers were seen trying in vain to clean the water on the riverbanks.       Luxembourg monarch to give crown to son LUXEMBOURG--Grand Duke Jean of Luxembourg is to end his 36-year reign today in an abdication ceremony. The 79-year-old monarch will step aside and Crown Prince Henri, 45, will be sworn in as the next ruler of this western European country of 429,000 citizens. The grand duke's role is largely ceremonial, but the monarchy remains popular.&nbsp;Caption:  photoThe Associated Press : A parked van in Japan, seen in an image from television, was damaged in a landslide triggered by the quake yesterday.
