AHMEDABAD, India--Pakistan put aside its bitter rivalry with India yesterday and joined earthquake-relief efforts, but heavy equipment and explosives brought in to clear debris signaled that hope of finding survivors had all but vanished. Experts say few people could survive more than 100 hours buried in rubble left by Friday's temblor, and much of the attention shifted to getting tents, blankets and medical care to the living. Officials have counted 7,148 bodies, but estimates of how high the death toll could rise varied widely. Indian Defense Minister George Fernandes estimated 100,000 may have died. Home Minister Haren Pandya said he believed the figure to be between 15,000 and 20,000. Prime Minister Atal Bihari Vajpayee said it was impossible and improper to guess. Aid from around the world was pouring into western India: a 747 loaded with water-purification equipment from the U.S., a $500,000 mobile hospital from Denmark, and a plane filled with tents and blankets from Pakistan. With nighttime temperatures about 41 degrees in the quake zone, blankets were a priority. "I have come on a humanitarian mission," said Ilyas Khan, director of Pakistan's emergency-relief agency, adding: "People are suffering." Pakistan, which has fought three wars with India and is locked in a nuclear cold war with its rival, said a second relief plane would be sent today and a third tomorrow. . Friday's magnitude-7.9 quake flattened the towns of Bhuj and Anjar  in India's western Gujarat state, which borders Pakistan, and left damage estimated at up to $5.5 billion. Despite aftershocks with magnitudes ranging up to 4.5 in the Bhuj area, there were no reports of new damage or casualties. Rescue workers kept up the task of digging into the debris of ruined buildings, but they called the search for survivors increasingly futile. "We talk about a limit of 100 hours, when after that the chances of finding someone alive drop dramatically," said Jochen Jakowski, the leader of a German rescue team in Anjar. "It is close to a world record if we find someone after 100 hours." In the wreckage, however, there were a few miracles yesterday. Among them was 16-year-old Ketan Rathod, pulled from the rubble alive in Anjar, where he was caught under concrete with his dead grandmother for 96 hours. And British experts pulled a 24-year-old man out of his destroyed home in Bhuj.
