In the days after the Nisqually Earthquake, disaster officials scrambled to let people know they could apply for federal aid if their home or apartment was badly damaged. Among those who got the message: a group of homeless men who spent the night before the Feb. 28 tremor at the Compass Center, a Pioneer Square shelter subsequently red-tagged by city inspectors. Sixty homeless men applied for the federal money, and dozens received checks of at least $1,200--the government's estimate of two months' rent in Seattle. Some of the men who stayed at the Compass Center that night received twice that amount to compensate for lost personal items. Although officials from Federal Emergency Management Agency personally talked to each homeless man before writing a check, the agency, as a matter of practice, doesn't monitor whether aid money is actually used for housing. In effect, the disaster relief became a large, unexpected gift to a group of street people. What happened next provides insights into the world of the homeless and underscores the fact that money doesn't always solve the problems of the down and out. About half the men used the money to move into permanent housing, while others spent it on the vices of the street or squandered it. "Some of the people who got that money weren't in the emotional frame of mind to handle it," said Rick Friedhoff, director of the Compass Center.       Earthquake damage Though several Pioneer Square  social-service agencies were damaged by the earthquake, the Compass Center fared the worst. No one was injured, but the walls of the brick building at 77 S. Washington St. pulled away from the fourth and fifth floors. Stairs sank and the place was dusted with plaster. The night before the earthquake, 75 men slept there. A day later, they were scattered across the city. Some shared hotel rooms. Others stayed in shelters or took to the streets. The Compass Center temporarily relocated its shelter to a basement of a Fremont church, and most of the men followed. Ron Johnson, 43, was staying in the Fremont shelter when another homeless man mentioned that television news reports were encouraging displaced residents to call a toll-free number and apply for aid. "We thought, maybe it will apply to us. We called and they said it did," Johnson said. In the next several days, FEMA sent claims adjusters to meet with the men at the Compass Center and survey the damage. The checks came a few days later. Word on the street spread quickly that the government was giving money away. Some of the recipients bragged that they had received checks of $10,000. Others said they told the claims adjusters they lost aquariums and laptop computers in the rubble, apparently fooling FEMA into awarding them more money. A FEMA spokesman said he had no knowledge of fraudulent claims. Johnson acknowledges that some people may grumble that taxpayer money is going to people who had no permanent place to stay before the earthquake. But the homeless were displaced just like every other victim, he said, even if the place they called home was just for a night. "The public at large is not always excited about the idea of a shelter. They're probably thinking, `Why are they getting money?' " he said. "For me, I was glad that it was there. I can't say enough thanks."       Where the money went For the staff at the Compass Center, the cash grants presented a thorny problem: how to convince the formerly destitute men to spend their windfall wisely. "We talked about how it fit with their plan, how it could fix a barrier to housing," said M.J. Kiser, shelter programs manager. "If we approved of the plan, they could stay in the shelter. If they blew the money, we said, `We're not going to continue to shelter you.' " For some of the men, the aid money helped pay rental deposits. According to the shelter, 25 men moved into permanent housing in March and April, compared with nine men in the previous two months. "That's an amazing number," Kiser said. Two men used the money to buy cars at towing-company auctions. Several others rented hotel rooms. One mentally ill man tried to use his money to buy 100 videotapes from a street hustler. But the deal was a scam, and the man walked away with only 30 tapes, Kiser said. Howard Jackson, 52, who ate breakfast at the Compass Center the day of the quake but wasn't eligible for aid because he spent the night at another shelter, says he has an idea where at least some of the money went: "sex, drugs and alcohol." For many, the FEMA aid only made their life worse, Johnson said. "The money was a disaster waiting to happen. But if a person uses it for ill gain, they can't say they never had the opportunity." It's not known how many of the men used the money to buy drugs or alcohol, but several of the shelter's regulars struggled with addiction, Kiser said. Johnson is one of three men still staying at the Fremont shelter. FEMA awarded him $1,200 for rent and an additional $1,000 to compensate him for multiple-sclerosis medications he was unable to recover from the building. He walks with a cane and uses public transit to travel from the shelter to computer classes at Seattle Central Community College. His plans are clear: save enough money to move into subsidized housing, try to reconcile with his ex-wife, and land a job as a systems administrator. State and federal officials have extended the deadline to apply for earthquake aid until June 30. If the men from Compass Center can provide receipts from reasonably priced hotels or apartments, they are encouraged to apply for further compensation, said FEMA spokesman Eugene Brezany. Johnson, for one, won't ask for any more money. "I got what I was due," he said. "I don't feel good about taking advantage of something like that."       Alex Fryer can be reached at 206- 464-8124 or afryer@seattletimes.com.Caption:  photoJim Bates / The Seattle Times : Ron Johnson, who is homeless, received a check from the government because the quake damaged the shelter where he was staying. He is using the money to take college computer classes.
