AHMEDABAD, India--The floors of the collapsed school are stacked on top of each other like four thick slices of bread, and crushed between them are dozens of the sons and daughters of India's striving middle class, trapped when a powerful earthquake struck this thriving city in western India on Friday. Yesterday, rescue workers armed with drills, cranes and bulldozers--but mostly just their bare hands--continued a desperate effort to save the high-school students still buried in the rubble. But all they dragged out were bodies, adding to the fast-growing death toll of more than 6,000 across the state of Gujarat. However, soldiers pulled three survivors, two men and a girl, from the rubble yesterday in Bhuj, near the border with Pakistan. Though a few people had been pulled from rubble by civilians in the early hours after the quake, yesterday's location of survivors, about 36 hours after the quake, was the first by rescue workers digging through ruins. After helicopter surveys of the ravaged districts, state and national officials estimated the death toll at 13,000 to 15,000--up from the 2,300 to 5,000 reported Friday--and warned it could climb further. The toll surpassed the nearly 10,000 killed in a quake in Maharashtra state in 1993. The Indian government's huge relief effort continued yesterday, with helicopters airdropping food, blankets, clothing and medical supplies to areas cut off from roads and railways. One hundred and forty doctors from New  Delhi and other parts of India, who volunteered to help treat an estimated 15,000 injured people, have been flown to the worst-hit areas. Joining efforts from countries around the world, the United States is sending $1 million in emergency supplies, officials said yesterday in Washington. Supplies including plastic sheeting, blankets, water containers, purification and distribution kits and generators were to arrive in India tomorrow, said officials at the U.S. Agency for International Development (AID). The agency, through the organization CARE, also began distributing 100 metric tons of food. AID also will provide financial assistance to support the work of relief groups already there. The devastation from the earthquake--which the U.S. Geological Survey put at a magnitude 7.9--is gravest around Bhuj, a city of 150,000 people near the epicenter of the earthquake. In neighboring Pakistan, the quake was reported to have killed 14 people. Each individual story of loss has its own poignancy, but the fate of the students at the Swamimarayan school seems especially cruel. These teenagers, with their dreams of being doctors, computer scientists and engineers, had come to school on Republic Day, a national holiday, for an extra science lab to prepare for exams. About 65 of them showed up Friday at 7:30 a.m. sharp, with their physics instruments and chemistry books. They were in the middle of their lab, when the building started shaking violently at 8:46 a.m. Pragna Jagdishthandra, a slender 16-year-old talking a mile a minute, was sitting next to the door of her classroom when the earthquake began. She fled for the stairs. A trail of panicked students raced behind her. She made it out just as the four-story school building, less than a year old, crumbled from front to back with a thunderous roar. Others--she is not sure how many--escaped as well. "But many of the children behind me were trapped," she said. "It was very dusty, and I couldn't see. But I clearly heard one girl's voice crying out, and my friend Priyanka was left behind." On Friday afternoon, the rescuers saved five of the students, who survived because pillars kept the roof from flattening them. "We heard children crying, `Please save us,' " said D.K. Mishra, a doctor with the government's rapid-action force, a paramilitary unit for emergencies. But the last living student was pulled from the wreckage Friday afternoon. Eight dead students were found Friday, and 20 more yesterday. Officials said 10 more could still be buried in the rubble. M. Jaysukhlalani, an accountant and father of a missing son, waited next to an ambulance. He had been there waiting 29 hours for his youngest son. But none of the four dead boys brought out yesterday afternoon was his Sunil. Like many of the parents here, and like many residents of Ahmedabad, he noticed that most of the buildings in the city withstood the earthquake, while isolated ones like his son's school--more than 100 of them--simply imploded. And like many others, he believed that shoddy construction was to blame. He bitterly wondered if some politically connected person got bureaucrats to look the other way while using sand in place of concrete. He talked of one man's impotence against corruption--a common complaint across India. "A single man can't do anything," he said. "Who will support him? No one." N.B. Parmar, the police inspector in the area, who was supervising the rescue effort, agreed that the building appeared to lack sufficient cement. "It will be investigated," he said.Caption:  photoArko Datta / AFP : A homeless family takes temporary shelter in a makeshift tent in front of a wrecked building in Bhuj that was destroyed in the earthquake that struck northwestern India on Friday.
