Masonry-crew foreman Aaron Michael looked a bit tired. It was only the first day after the Big Quake of '01, but the company he works for, Masonry Specialties, had been swamped with calls for help. Typically, the company gets a handful of calls a day. In the 24 hours after the quake, it got about 200, said owner Marty Smith. "Everyone thinks theirs is an emergency," said Michael, standing outside an old Capitol Hill apartment building that suffered two damaged chimneys. Some cases are emergencies, some cases aren't. Rubble may remain on the ground a while, as it has at the Stimson-Green Mansion on First Hill, where part of a chimney tumbled onto the lawn. Work crews are scrambling after Wednesday's earthquake. Business is booming for masonry companies, structural engineering firms and others that repair and assess quake damage. The quake also gave a big boost to the pay-phone industry because of the difficulty people had in using their cell phones. Qwest, which operates about 10,000 pay phones in the Seattle-Tacoma area, reported usage at least doubled, said spokesman Jim Brandt. He said reports of the demise of the pay-phone industry have been exaggerated. "We have no plans of getting out the business and are glad (the phones) helped out," Brandt said. Another company that got an inadvertent boost was Regus Business Centres, which took out a big newspaper ad that ran the morning before the quake. It said in big type: "How quickly do  you need your new office?" The New York-based company had a "noticeable increase" in the number of people in the Seattle area requesting temporary office space, said Bob Gaudreau, director of marketing and sales. "It helps, but I'd like to get business in other ways," he said. "You can't build a business on this consistently, can you?" Regus yesterday announced that it is offering free office space and meeting rooms for emergency organizations for up to 30 days at the Lake Union Centre, 1100 Dexter Ave. N. The company also said it may provide space at the Lake Union Centre, Bank of America Tower and Key Center in Bellevue at discounted rates for a limited time to companies displaced by the earthquake. The quake also is expected to be a boon to people who repair cracks in walls. "We'll have a lot of busy drywallers for the next month or two," said Betsy Sutherland, vice president of property management for the Bentall development company. Mike Bevins, carpenter-shop foreman for Unico Properties, said he'll probably be hiring extra help starting next week to repair the cracks in their buildings. But he was struck by how well Unico's buildings, especially the older ones, held up. The oldest structure is the 91-year-old Cobb Building in downtown Seattle. Most of its cracks and falling plaster were limited to the stairwells. "For as old as it is, the old building didn't do too bad," Bevins said. The quake didn't boost the business of all repair companies. "I kind of dreaded coming in this morning, but we only had one (quake-related) call," said Brad Towle, a salesman at North End Glass in Seattle. That may be because today's double-pane windows are more quake-resistant, said company co-owner Janice Radich. Also, it may take a few days before business picks up, as people first contact their insurance companies to see what's covered. Meanwhile, this is prime time for inspectors and structural engineers. At the NBBJ headquarters on South Jackson Street in Seattle, John Hooper examined the steel brackets that connect the brick walls and wooden beams of the five-story architectural office building. "There were no flakes in the paint or signs of discoloration," said Hooper, the principal and director of earthquake engineering at Skilling, Ward, Magnusson, Barkshire. "So that means nothing pulled loose." More than 40 of Skilling's engineers had performed initial assessments on 200 buildings by yesterday evening, Hooper said. The assessments determine whether it's safe for people to be inside. At the Bellevue-based DCI structural engineering firm, the phone has been ringing every five minutes since the quake hit, said principal structural engineer Guy Conversano. "We sort of set up a little dispatch board so we know where people are heading," Conversano said."The challenge is manpower. There's a shortage of engineers anyway and it's already difficult to keep up with the normal workload," he said. "But we as engineeers have some obligation to the community to respond to these emergency situations." He said engineers are working overtime to respond to all the calls. The business of cleaning up after the quake may take a long time and can be costly. Smith, of Masonry Specialties, expects his overhead to increase by about 50 percent as he hires more masons and equipment to handle demand. "We'll be busy rebuilding from the earthquake for the next five years," he said.       Bill Kossen's telephone message number is 206-464-2331. His e-mail address is bkossen@seattletimes.com.Caption:  photoJim Bates / The Seattle TimesJim Bates / The Seattle Times : Business is booming for Aaron Michael of Masonry Specialties since the earthquake.
