With relatives homeless and hungry and many villages cut off from the outside world, Salvadorans living in the United States flew home yesterday to help bury the dead and rebuild their country after a devastating earthquake that killed nearly 700 people. More than 1 million Salvadorans--15 percent of the country's population--live in the United States, and many spent harrowing days watching television images of corpses being dug out from landslides with no word from relatives. Telephone lines were either down or jammed with calls, and the airport reopened to only limited flights Sunday. Saturday's earthquake of 7.6 magnitude killed at least 683 people, including six in neighboring Guatemala. The Salvadoran government estimates it caused more than $1 billion in damage, almost half of the small nation's annual budget. Although more bodies were still being found, many were so mangled by landslides that it was difficult to determine how many had been killed or even recovered. Others will remain buried at the bottom of remote mountain valleys. In Las Colinas, a neighborhood outside San Salvador where a collapsed hillside accounted for more than half of the national death toll, bulldozers ripped through debris and packed dirt while a few remaining families sifted through belongings. The family members waited for a fifth day as officials looked for evidence of those lost. Some complained the large earthmovers would further maim any bodies that were left. As  rescue efforts waned, the focus turned toward feeding and housing 45,000 people evacuated from their homes. Roads to many small villages remained blocked, some nearly completely destroyed by the quake. Damaged pipes made safe drinking water scarce across the country. Meanwhile, there was more bad news. The last survivor pulled from the rubble--22-year-old musician Sergio Moreno, who spent 31 hours entombed under cinderblocks and dirt--died late Tuesday at a hospital. Moreno's rescue had captured the country's attention, with television stations showing live footage of him being pulled from his buried house after he used his cellular phone to call for help.
