OLYMPIA--With a quake-damaged bridge behind him, the director of the Federal Emergency Management Agency expanded the disaster declaration for the Nisqually Earthquake farther into Eastern Washington and extended it by 30 days. FEMA Director Joe Allbaugh's announcement yesterday gives people and businesses affected by the quake until May 31 to make claims for assistance. He urged those with damage or losses from the Feb. 28 quake to register their claims. The 6.8-magnitude Nisqually Earthquake injured more than 400 people and caused an estimated $2 billion damage to homes, businesses, roads and government buildings. Thus far, FEMA has received more than 19,500 housing-assistance applications and has paid out more than $23.8 million to 12,520 people, along with $45,500 in disaster-unemployment benefits and $1.2 million in grants for families and individuals with other disaster-related needs. Allbaugh also added Douglas, Walla Walla, Cowlitz and Pacific counties to the list of counties eligible for aid in repairing damage to public facilities, bringing the total to 13. Although some counties were far from the quake's epicenter, there was damage--to the state prison in Walla Walla, for example. And some counties qualify more easily for assistance because their sparse populations would make it difficult to raise money to make repairs, said Rob Harper, a spokesman for Washington Emergency Management. As Allbaugh spoke yesterday, work continued  behind him on a temporary replacement for Olympia's Fourth Avenue Bridge, which was severely damaged. Mayor Stan Biles and U.S. Rep. Brian Baird, D-Wash., described the bridge as a vital conduit for business and emergency vehicles "Without the federal government, we wouldn't be building the temporary bridge," Biles said. FEMA has received more than 240 applications for money to repair public facilities. The federal government pays 75 percent of the cost of qualified projects. FEMA estimates the earthquake damaged more than 1,100 public buildings and caused $204 million damage to public infrastructure.
