I hate to bring this up, given that Seattle has a reputation for not exactly being a church-going town. This is high-tech country. If there is a bug in the computer application, just work another 200 overtime hours in the next two days and fix it. But, come on, I know what crossed some of your thoughts at 10:54 a.m. Wednesday morning and through the rest of the day. Somebody up there was sending a message. Digital doesn't always rule. This was no Dolby-enhanced quadraphonic rumble we heard as we munched on popcorn at the Cineplex. This sure seemed like the longest 30 seconds ever. There was no "delete" key we could hit to make it go away, no "stop," no "back" click. "Is this when I'm going to see that bright light?" Scott Linn thought to himself. You know about that bright light, the one you're supposed to see before you meet your maker. Scott Linn, 47, married, a Boeing flight test engineer, is your typical Seattle non-church-goer, an agnostic type who steps into church mostly when attending a wedding or a funeral. He works on the fourth floor of one of those Boeing buildings on East Marginal Way, the ones built on top of landfill. He got under his desk when the quake hit, and even then, as he was on his hands and knees, it knocked Linn flat. Everyone in his work group also has a pilot's license. "We pride ourselves on remaining calm under unexpected circumstances," Linn said. "This was a very humbling experience. We like to think we're powerful.  This reminds us there is always something more powerful." All over the TV news, they kept rerunning the video footage of that education and technology conference at which Bill Gates was ready to speak when the hotel began rumbling and stuff started dropping from the ceiling. Gates kept his cool, kind of looking around in curiosity, but a wire-service report said that the "audience bolted for the exits. Some audience members were knocked down by others trying to get out." Sorry. This was out of the hands of the technical-support guys. Yelling at customer-service that you wanted this fixed like right now because you had an order to ship out wasn't going to help. On Wednesday afternoon, I was talking to another typical Seattle non-church-goer. We were standing across the street from the Stockridge Apartments near Boren Avenue and Union Street, looking at the tons of brick and concrete roof facade that had fallen six stories. Steve Christensen, 36, saw the stuff come crashing down, sounding like cars had collided, the dust rising 20 or 30 feet. He's the maintenance supervisor at the adjoining apartment building. "Funny you should ask about God," he said. "I'm not even a Christian. I mean, my girlfriend and I live together, you know? I must have talked to 50 people who were around here, watching the scene, and half of them said things like, `This is a wake-up call.' " Christensen cordoned off the area with some yellow plastic tape. He talked with the onlookers who looked in awe at the scene. A theme kept going through the conversations. "Most everyone's opinion was that we were getting a message. I mean after all the stuff that happened in Pioneer Square and everything. We were getting told that enough is enough," he said. The big earthquake day also happened to be Ash Wednesday, and on that afternoon, the Rev. Michael Ryan, pastor at St. James Cathedral, was getting ready for services at this spiritual center for the region's Catholics. If you were a parishioner and asked Ryan about all this, he'd tell you, "We have great faith in technology. But as good as that technology gets, today we were reminded how far it doesn't go," the priest said. Well, those were thoughts some of us pondered a few days ago, before things got back to normal. Now we can return to regular programming ... Hey! What's that rumble! Right, right, it was just a helicopter flying overhead. Remember, Big Guy, wait another five decades before sending your next 6.8-magnitude reminder, OK?       Contact Erik Lacitis at 206-464-2237 or e-mail: elacitis@seattletimes.com.Caption:  photoDean Rutz / The Seattle Times Jim Reeves connected last week's earthquake with predictions in the Bible. He's probably not the only one who thinks so.
