Q: I'm a homeowner of modest means. Over the years, my supplemental earthquake insurance has become very expensive while the benefits have decreased. My home sustained minor damage in the last quake, and I was able to receive FEMA money to cover most of the repair. If I were to drop my quake coverage, would I still qualify for FEMA funding in the event of a future quake?       A:       Getting disaster aid from the Federal Emergency Management Agency does not hinge on also having earthquake insurance; in fact, the two things are unrelated. The bigger issue, says FEMA public-affairs officer Mike Howard, is making sure your home is protected - because getting FEMA money is not guaranteed. This money becomes available only if a disaster receives a presidential federal-disaster declaration. Howard says that doesn't happen after every quake, yet mild ones can and do damage homes. Even if FEMA funds are made available, "they're not designed to, and rarely do, make people whole after a serious loss," he says. Thus, if you don't have insurance, you're looking at paying some or all of the bill out of your own pocket or through loans, such as the U.S. Small Business Administration's disaster loan. Howard says borrowers who use it "get favorable interest and long terms (for repayment), but they are indeed loans that need to be paid back."       Q: When my daughter bought her townhouse, I made her a $10,000 gift toward the down payment. She'd now like to transfer the  townhouse to me without going through the formality of a sale. Is this possible? How do we go about it?       A:       Assuming she has one, the first issue is your daughter's mortgage, says Seattle attorney Mary Ann Vance. Most mortgages have a due-on-sale clause that says the holder can't transfer ownership on the property without getting the lender's approval. "So first, she'd want to get the lender's approval, and then the mechanics of transferring it would be she could quit-claim deed it to you," Vance explains, adding "it's not the mechanics that's the problem, it's the fact that the mortgage doesn't go away." Thus you'll either have to pay it off immediately or refinance in your name.       Q: A developer behind us just built a fence that's two feet over my backyard property line and my next-door neighbor's property line. My neighbor is sure the fence is over the line because she had a survey done several years ago. The developer says he also had a survey done and he's not over the property line. Is there an easy and affordable way to learn who's right?       A:       That depends on what your research turns up. Port Angeles surveyor James Wengler, immediate past president of the Land Surveyors Association of Washington, says a survey is only valid if the surveyor is state licensed. So ask your neighbor and the contractor for the names of their surveyors, then check their licenses. Obviously if one is licensed and the other isn't, that's the end of the story. If they are licensed, their surveys should have left what are called monuments. Commonly a two- or three-foot piece of rebar or pipe, each monument is pounded flush into the ground at the corner of the lot, then capped with a piece of plastic bearing the surveyor's license number. Even if a monument can't be seen, it should be detectable with a metal detector. Since you believe two surveys have been done, there should be two sets of monuments. Know, though, that "it's not uncommon for monuments to have been disturbed," Wengler says. Next step is to get copies of both surveys; they should be recorded at the county auditor's office. (Alternately, you can ask a title company to research the survey.) Wengler says you may need help deciphering them, which a third surveyor can do. "Generally, if everyone did the job the way it was supposed to be, there should be a paper trail of every monument and where it was set and how it was set," Wengler says. If this still doesn't settle the issue, your new surveyor should do a retracement survey, which should reveal why there are two conflicting surveys. Wengler suggests you don't let this issue slide because if you do, you run the risk of permanently losing two feet of your lot.       Home Forum answers readers' real-estate questions. Send questions to Home Forum, Seattle Times, P.O. Box 1845, Seattle, WA 98111, or call 206-464-8510 to leave your question on a recorded line. The e-mail address is erhodes@seattletimes.com. Sorry, no personal replies. More columns at www.seattletimes.com/columnists
