Emergency 911 calls from unincorporated King County and 13 suburban cities went unanswered for several minutes in the immediate aftermath of Wednesday's earthquake, the county Sheriff's Office said yesterday. Spokesman John Urquhart said the communications center in the basement of the King County Courthouse in downtown Seattle was evacuated right after the quake, and the 911 system was down until operations could be transferred to the office's four outlying precincts. "For several minutes, and maybe more than several minutes, those calls went unanswered," he said. Urquhart couldn't say precisely how long the system was down. "Cabinets had to be unlocked at the precincts, phones plugged in," he said. "We've practiced it, and we were real pleased with how it went. ... "If there was a way to make it automatic, believe me, we would make it automatic. But there isn't." The county provides 911 service to unincorporated areas, and to 13 cities on a contract basis. Shoreline and SeaTac are the largest, Urquhart said. The communications center in the courthouse reopened at 7 a.m. Thursday and began handling 911 calls again.       Courthouse to reopen Meanwhile, King County officials announced yesterday that the 87-year-old courthouse has been inspected by engineers and proclaimed structurally safe. They said it will reopen to the public and employees Monday. "I am sort of amazed myself at how well this great old gal did," Councilwoman  Louise Miller said. The King County Administration Building and the first six floors of the county's Yesler Building also will reopen Monday. Like the courthouse, they were evacuated immediately after the earthquake and remained closed to the public and most employees for the rest of the week. County Executive Ron Sims said the Yesler Building's seventh floor, which houses Transit Division offices, remains closed for cleanup of fallen asbestos insulation. The courthouse already is scheduled for seismic improvements, with construction set to begin in November. Sims said he would work with the County Council to see if that schedule can be accelerated.       Eric Pryne can be reached at 206- 464-2231 or epryne@seattletimes.com.Caption:  photoMike Siegel / The Seattle Times : King County sheriff's Deputies Wesley Tanksley, left, and Dwight Monohon check out the quake damage in a courtroom. The courthouse will reopen Monday.This crack on the third floor of the King County Courthouse is large enough to put a hand in.
