OLYMPIA--Enforcing modern building codes in the years leading up to last month's earthquake helped prevent the collapsed houses that kill and maim thousands after quakes in other countries, building inspectors and emergency officials said yesterday. The magnitude-6.8 quake Feb. 28 left more than 400 people injured, but caused no deaths. "This area had a pretty massive earthquake, but nothing much happened," said John Neff, head of building inspection for the city of Lacey and president of the Washington Association of Building Officials. Neff credits hundreds of building inspectors around the region for ensuring buildings were constructed and renovated according to the latest codes. Countries around the world suffer much worse damage during earthquakes even though their buildings are subject to similar standards. "The difference is that when the buildings are built, the codes are not enforced, and the buildings are not built to withstand the earthquake," Neff said. Among the requirements are long bolts to keep houses from jumping off their foundations, and braces in basements and attics to prevent swaying. Bill Lokey, Federal Emergency Management Agency coordinator for the quake, echoed Neff and urged homeowners to learn from the experience and make sure their homes are up to code. "Sound zoning and permitting are the community's first line of defense," Lokey said. Building codes are a relatively recent innovation. Washington had no  statewide code until 1974, and houses built before 1980 may not be up to standards, Neff said. "Any of that housing is at risk," Neff said. Some of the quake's most visible damage can be seen in the historic neighborhood just south of the state Capitol. Bright blue tarps cover the holes left by toppled chimneys, and thick pieces of lumber brace unstable walls. A few years ago, a smaller quake prompted Lucy Harter to retrofit her house rather than buy earthquake insurance. She had the house bolted to the foundation and plywood attached to basement walls to prevent swaying. Harter's chimney toppled, but otherwise the damage to her 80-year-old house was confined to a few minor cracks in the plaster. "We paid $1,500 and figure we got a good deal," Harter said.
