Despite a $14 million modernization project, Stevens Elementary School will need as much as $2.7 million in repairs to meet code requirements intended to prevent collapse in a major earthquake. It is the most significant mistake to date in the Seattle School District's Building Excellence Program to rebuild or replace its aging schools, a program touted as generally on time and within budget. The School Board will be asked today to authorize an open-ended contract to disassemble parts of the three-story structure and reinforce it as needed. The problem, which school district officials blame on design errors, comes three months after voters approved a six-year extension of the $363 million Building Excellence program that has rebuilt or replaced 14 schools. Originally scheduled to reopen last September, the 95-year-old Capitol Hill school is now expected to welcome students back this September. Students have attended classes in the old McDonald Elementary in the Wallingford area since construction began in 1999. The estimated cost of repairs is $1 million to $2.7 million. Attorneys for the district have put the architect, Arai/Jackson Architects &amp; Planners, on notice that it may have grounds for a claim to recover the additional cost. Jeffrey Hamlett, project manager for Arai/Jackson, denied the district's claim. "We disagree with their experts' analysis of the design. We think the design is just fine. We are working with them in going  through our design and working with them to address our concerns," Hamlett said. Engineering of the Stevens renovation was done by Arai/Jackson subcontractor I.L. Gross Structural Engineers. Ira Gross of I.L. Gross referred questions to Arai/Jackson. The first indication of a problem--a sagging floor in a new wing of the remodeled school--was noticed before the February levy vote, but officials said the full extent of the design errors wasn't known until several weeks after the vote. District officials hired an engineering firm in January to determine whether the sagging floor was an isolated problem. After studying drawings, the consultant reported the design of some floors and walls in the old and new classroom wings did not meet code. A second engineering firm, studying the structure and plans in more detail, confirmed that conclusion. Problems are believed to be less severe in two separate buildings that hold a day-care center, cafeteria and gymnasium. The second firm, Tacoma-based Chalker Putnam Collins &amp; Scott, has been hired to advise the district on engineering issues during the repair project. "We're not talking about a building that's ready to collapse. We are talking about a building that's not meeting earthquake standards," said John Vacchiery, executive director of facilities development and construction. Baugh Construction has begun moving a crew onto the school property in anticipation of School Board approval of a time-and-materials contract to repair the building. Interior and exterior walls will be opened to determine how much work must be done. "Of course we're disappointed," said Principal Larry Bell, "but the most important thing that people are concerned about is that the building be safe. We're willing to give whatever time it takes to make sure that happens. "The saving grace is we've been promised we will definitely be in there in the fall." Stevens, with its wooden siding and gabled porticoes, resembles the Coe and Latona elementary buildings also designed by architect James Stephen. Coe was undergoing renovation when it was destroyed in January by a fire of undetermined origin. Seattle's older public schools have been reinforced in recent years to improve earthquake safety, but many are still not up to current codes. It is unusual, however, to discover a failure to meet structural codes in a new or renovated school building. Vacchiery said Stevens' deficiencies weren't immediately apparent because the building code lets architects and engineers calculate what materials are needed and how they should be installed to provide a specified amount of strength to withstand earthquakes and high winds. Because of uncertainties about the cost and liability for repairs at Stevens, it isn't known whether the repairs will put the first phase of the Building Excellence Program over budget, Vacchiery said.       Keith Ervin can be reached at 206-464-2105 or kervin@seattletimes.com.Caption:  photoHarley Soltes / The Seattle Times : Fences will stay around Stevens Elementary School, which has already undergone a $14 million renovation.
