Most here on Feb. 28 certainly felt the 6.8 Nisqually earthquake. The issue now is what lessons did that quake leave that might help us prepare for the next one? That will be one topic at Disaster Saturday, a free earthquake-preparedness forum scheduled for this coming Saturday at Seattle's Town Hall, 1119 Eighth Ave. Hours are 8:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. Also on the schedule is a workshop on chimney-damage detection and repair, which was a huge issue after February's quake. "If they have a blocked flue, or some other damage that's not seen, homeowners need to become aware of that," says Ines Pearce, director of Seattle Project Impact, which is sponsoring the event, along with Seattle Emergency Management. "As we go into the fall, this is a huge issue, and the fire department is very concerned about this." Other workshops include retrofitting homes to protect against earthquake damage, and how to make classrooms safer in the event of a quake. Experts will explain the region's earthquake and landslide risks. "If you live in the Central Puget Sound area, this is one way you can learn a lot of different things specific to you and get your questions answered on the spot," says Pearce. "People will learn about easy, practical steps they can take to minimize their vulnerability in a major disaster." Project Impact is a public-private partnership, initially funded by a Federal Emergency Management Agency grant, whose aim is to help communities make  grass-roots preparation for disasters. Saturday's event is open to all, regardless of where they live in the Puget Sound area. "Whether you live in a house, condo or apartment, whether you had damage (from the Nisqually quake) or not, if you're curious about the hazards, this is definitely the place to find out," Pearce says. "We're here to provide all the information and resources to help people take action." Each workshop is 45 minutes. American Sign Language interpreters will be present. Parking is available, next to the building or within a block, for $4 to $6 for the day. For more information about Disaster Saturday, call Seattle Project Impact at 206-615-0288 or go online to       www.cityofseattle.net /projectimpact      .
