FEDERAL WAY--Last week's 6.8 earthquake was a "fender-bender," disaster officials told local county officials yesterday. And Puget Sound is still at risk for a "head-on collision" with a far more serious temblor. In a hastily assembled presentation to the combined King and Pierce county councils, emergency planners warned that the region is prone to more severe quakes that could cause far more injuries and cripple the region's economy. "Last week was the wake-up call," said Steve Bailey, emergency-services manager for Pierce County. With an epicenter 30 miles beneath the surface, the Nisqually Earthquake offered no surprises for geologists, added Craig Weaver of the U.S. Geological Survey. But a shallow, "crustal" quake is likely to have far greater consequences. "This is the one we should have been ready for," Weaver said. "The big, crustal faults go off less frequently, and when they do... well, we didn't really get tested by this earthquake." Officials spoke at the invitation of the county councils, which held an unusual joint meeting in Federal Way. Originally aimed at addressing the energy crunch, the agenda was juggled to review the region's preparedness for a major quake. Emergency officials used the opportunity to make a bid for money and political clout to improve regional planning and stiffen regulations for schools and other buildings. Eric Holdeman, King County emergency-services manager, warned that the region's transportation  system would be jeopardized by a crustal quake. King and Pierce counties have collaborated in "Project Impact," a regional program to draw attention to the risks and lobby for safer buildings. But the federal money for that project is due to run out at the end of the year, Holdeman said.       Low-interest SBA loans The Small Business Administration has already received 3,500 applications for low-interest loans to repair homes and businesses. The SBA loans are used to rebuild homes that suffered more extensive damage than can be covered by the $10,000 maximum grants awarded by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. Most of the SBA loans are offered at 3.5 percent interest, far below the commercial lending rate. Rick Jenkins, an SBA spokesman, said homeowners who have earthquake insurance don't have to wait for the settlement before applying for the SBA loan, adding that it can be used to cover any insurance deductible. For information, call 800-462-9029.       Ross Anderson can be reached at 206-464-2061 or randerson@seattletimes.com.
