Along with all the bills that made it out of the state House and Senate alive yesterday was a crowd of relieved legislators looking for a bit more room and a lot less of each other. By forcing the closure of the plush Capitol building, the recent earthquake brought new meaning to the term "public service." Legislators were fighting a deadline to get bills passed under conditions some compared to homesteading, others to war. "Oh, I'm just loving it," deadpanned state Sen. Bob Oke, R-Port Orchard, the other morning. "We've got three at a table, can you imagine that?" Saw it for myself over in Hearing Room E in the John L. O'Brien Building, where House members were crammed at tables, papers stacked below, trash cans at their feet. They straddled table legs in that haphazard, temporary way the rest of us sit to fill out deposit slips and sign cards. Not a very firm platform for the making of state law. There are no phones, no laptops, and no e-mail. Pages can't get through the tight seating to deliver messages, so legislators pass the slips down the row, like love notes in the sixth grade. And since all votes are taken by hand (the "nay" votes are counted and subtracted from the total), legislators can't ask their seatmate to cast their electronic vote while they slip out to the bathroom. They must be there to be counted. Rep. Al O'Brien, D-Mountlake Terrace, has the worst seat in the House. He's crammed between two tables, so his desk is  actually a crack. But he told me he's trained for such conditions--he served in Vietnam. "I've been in rough times before, I'll survive," O'Brien shrugged. "Some people are feeling sorry for me." Are they buying him lunch? "Not       that       sorry." It may not be a bad idea, things being what they are, to skip a meal or two. Rep. Laura Ruderman, D-Redmond, recalled one legislator ("This       big guy") squeezing through the chairs to get to the microphone to talk about a bill. "It's a good combination between `Little House on the Prairie' and est," she said. "It's very rustic, and you're pretty much trapped in here." The earthquake forced the Capitol Grill out of its location, so it now has a makeshift setup at the end of a hall. Yesterday, owner Ora Sherwood opened the "Outback B.B.Q." on the patio outside, offering a "Big Quake Burger: &frac12;-pound with all the tremors ... uhh... trimmings" for "the seismic price of 6.8 dollars." Broken cookies and shaken sodas included. Another bright spot: Floor speeches are shorter. Once lawmakers leave the hearing room, though, they have to negotiate a crowded, narrow hall--a veritable fishnet for lobbyists looking to catch a moment of power and influence. Richard "Dick" King, who served 30 years here, remembered meeting at the Tyee Hotel after the last earthquake. "It was the only place where we could find a large enough meeting room," said King, now a lobbyist for the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers. "It's humbling," he said, "to see what nature can do." A bit of humility--and a dose of humor--can only be a good influence on those who hold so much power.       Nicole Brodeur's column appears Sunday, Tuesday and Thursday. Reach her at 206-464-2334; or at nbrodeur@seattletimes.com. She hopes the Mole Bill passed.
