ANJAR, India--Three-year-old Richa clings to her grandmother and buries her wet face in the old woman's weathered neck, rocking and whimpering for her mother, "Mammi, Mammi." Richa can't understand that her parents were among more than 19,000 people killed in an earthquake a month ago. Now, Richa lives in a blue tent in Anjar's sports stadium with her grandmother, who is in her 60s. "As long as I am alive, I will look after her," says Richa's grandmother, Parvati Pithadia. "But how long is that?" So far, state officials have counted only 350 earthquake orphans, although early estimates after the Jan. 26 quake placed the figure at 8,000. But there are no orphanages filled with wide-eyed babies waiting to be adopted; the close-knit extended families and caste communities that comprise India's 1 billion people have taken in the quake orphans. In addition, the Gujarat state government has banned any adoptions for at least three months and is building group homes for orphans and widows. "Uprooting a child for adoption, that would be absolutely harmful to their psychological stability," said S.K. Nanda, state official in charge of earthquake orphans. "Well-meaning people around the world might think international adoption is in the best interests of a child who has lost his or her parents," said Maria Calivis, UNICEF representative in India. "But adoption within the extended family or community is recognized as the first and best option."  Eighteen-month-old Bhavik jabbers and plays with his grandfather, seemly oblivious to the loss of his left arm, which was amputated by Belgian doctors. His grandfather, Jayaram Kanji Nathani, says the toddler also appears to have blocked out the loss of his parents. "He doesn't call for them, doesn't realize what's happened," said Nathani, a 48-year-old mason. Bhavik's father, a paramedic, was killed in the collapse of Anjar's municipal hospital. The wooden beam that gouged Bhavik's arm also killed his mother. An aunt came from another town, offering to take Bhavik. "But he refused to go to her, so she let him stay here with me," said the grandfather, holding Bhavik tightly. "We will never let him go." Some organizations believe the number of unaccompanied children from the quake must be much higher than the hundreds officially counted. And they worry that once families reassess their financial status, parentless children could be turned away or even sold. However, officials are mindful of recent history: A cyclone struck Orissa state in 1999, killing 30,000 people and leaving 1,500 children without parents. UNICEF says all the orphans were taken in by relatives. "Adoption is a noble gesture, but let this society take care of their own," said Dr. Yogendra Mathur, the UNICEF representative in Gujarat. "So far, we haven't come across any child who is fully unattended." Gujarat state is setting up trusts that will give each parentless child $2,175 at age 18. In the meantime, guardians will be able to claim the interest and get an additional $10.85 a month to cover expenses. "We have so much love to offer them," said Bhavik's grandfather, Nathani. "Why should they be taken from us?" In the nearby town of Bhuj, the family of 13-month-old Sajel Rajgor is also clinging to her dearly. Sajel's mother and 5-year-old brother were crushed to death and her leg had to be amputated. The family accepted an American woman's offer to help with medical care for her. They made it clear, however, that Sajel should remain in Bombay for treatment and must eventually return to her uncle's home in Bhuj.       Quake in China kills three, closes hydropower station BEIJING--A magnitude-6 earthquake struck southwestern China yesterday, killing three people, collapsing buildings and leaving a massive crack in a dam. The quake struck Ganzi in Sichuan province, the government's Xinhua News Agency said. The quake left a massive crack in the Hetaoping hydropower station's intake pipe, which shut the plant down, the news agency said.       El Salvador hit by another quake; no injuries reported SAN SALVADOR, El Salvador--An earthquake measuring 4.2 on the Richter scale hit El Salvador yesterday, causing widespread alarm but no reported injuries. The tremor follows two major quakes this year that killed more than 1,150 people. The National Emergency Committee said the tremor, centered just south of the capital, San Salvador, caused many Salvadorans to abandon cars and buildings.Caption:  photoThe Associated Press : Doctors amputated 18-month-old Bhavik Rathud's left hand, which was injured in last month's earthquake.
