FORT LEWIS--For more than 70 years, the 91st Infantry Monument here has celebrated the "Wild West Division"--30,000 cowboys, loggers, farmers and city boys who served in World War I. The division--drawn from Washington, California, Oregon, Nevada, Utah, Montana and Wyoming--was the first to train at Camp Lewis. More than 6,000 of its men were wounded or killed in France's Argonne Forest and at Ypres-Lys in Belgium. Five were awarded the Medal of Honor. Northwest newspapers lionized them, and everyone knew their battle cry: "Powder River! Let 'er buck!" But time has passed, the memories have faded. And now, damage from the 6.8-magnitude Nisqually earthquake is threatening the 40-foot-tall sandstone and bronze structure. It needed about $100,000 in restorative work before the Feb. 28 quake. The temblor made things worse. How much worse is still being determined. "Some structural engineers have looked at it and say it's not sound. Others have looked at it and say they think it can be repaired," said Paul McGuff, the cultural resources program manager here. The monument, unveiled on Memorial Day 1930, was part of a wave of monument building after World War I. Frank McDermott, then owner of the Bon March&eacute;, put up $50,000. The monument, the work of Seattle architect John Graham and sculptor Avard Fairbanks, features a medieval crusader on a pedestal inscribed: "The Right Shall Prevail." Below him are two doughboy sentries, a Red Cross  nurse and a welfare worker comforting a wounded soldier. "These are heroic figures, larger-than-life figures," said Fred Walters, an Independence, Ore., architectural consultant working on a restoration plan. For years, 91st Division veterans returned to Fort Lewis each Armistice Day to lay wreaths at its base and remember their fallen comrades. "It was a special outfit," says William Lake, now 105 and one of just four surviving division veterans. But he's never seen the monument. When he came home in 1919, he'd had enough of soldiering and wanted only to get back to the family farm in Lewistown, Mont. The folks working on a restoration plan hope repair will move quickly enough that Lake can attend a rededication ceremony. But it's just one of more than 200 of the historic structures at Fort Lewis damaged by the quake, said McGuff, the base's historic preservation officer. Most of the $4.4 million in damage is limited to stress cracks and toppled chimneys. But because virtually all the damaged buildings are in use, they likely will take priority when it comes to repairs, post officials said. U.S. Rep. Adam Smith, D-Tacoma, is researching a possible Save America's Treasures grant through the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Park Service. Lake--an ammo hauler with a machine gun company in the 362nd Infantry--spent nine months training here with the division in 1917. That June, he and his comrades boarded trains for the East Coast and sailed across the Atlantic. They first saw action in the Meuse-Argonne offensive of September 1918, the American Expeditionary Force's largest campaign of the war. In nine days of fighting in the Argonne Forest, the 91st had 1,019 killed, 3,916 wounded. "I lost my best buddy there. That's war. They're here today, gone tomorrow," Lake said. "I was one of the lucky ones, that's all." When he got home, "They had some parades, but I didn't go," he said. "I had enough of it."
