SAN FRANCISCO--When an elephant puts its foot down, people listen. And so, apparently, do other elephants--using their toenails to sense messages sent from 20 miles away. A new study by Stanford University researchers indicates that elephants use foot-stomping and vocal rumblings as part of an elaborate system of seismic communication, sending vibrations through the ground to other elephants far beyond the reach of audible sound. "If they are sensing these messages in the ground, it radically changes our perspective on how far they can communicate," said Caitlin O'Connell-Rodwell, a visiting scholar at the Stanford Center for Conservation Biology. "They may be communicating at far greater distances than we thought." O'Connell-Rodwell's study, in the December issue of the Journal of the Acoustical Society of America, sheds new light on how elephant herds transmit messages--sensing greetings or warnings of danger through their feet. By studying separate groups of elephants in Africa, India and in captivity in Texas, the Stanford researcher found indications that elephants have a highly developed set of seismic signals, creating ground vibrations both through their vocal calls, which create a low-level rumbling, and by stomping their feet in mock charges. Other animals, from moles and seals to insects, fish and reptiles, use seismic signals to find mates, locate prey or establish territories. But elephants' methods appear to be more complex, and to  travel far greater distances. O'Connell-Rodwell said seismic waves created by elephant actions were transmitted through the ground. Elephants, particularly females, picked up the signals. "We think they're sensing these underground vibrations through their feet," O'Connell-Rodwell said. "Seismic waves could travel through their toenails to the ear via bone conduction, or they may be using seismic sensitivity in their trunk. It may be a combination of both." Observation in Angola hinted that seismic signals may travel even farther, with thirsty herds detecting and moving toward thunderstorms 100 miles away.
