It was earthshaking news even before the 6.8 tremor rumbled through Seattle. The new owners of the 87-year-old OK Hotel on Alaskan Way proposed turning the historic building into a parking garage. In fact, the issue was being debated before the Pioneer Square Preservation Board when the Nisqually earthquake interrupted the discussion. Since then, those who want to preserve Seattle's historic Pioneer Square district have been jolted by more than the earthquake. Both the quake-damaged OK and Cadillac hotels are threatened by demolition, which critics say would erode a rich history of Seattle's early working-class days. "They're irreplaceable. You don't come to a historic district with an eye to tearing down, but to repair, renovate, sustain and make the buildings last as long as they possibly can," said David Brunner, with the Pioneer Square Community Council. "Taking down a building must be a very thoughtful process. This is a collection of buildings that works as a whole. You take one piece out and it changes everything." For the 111-year-old Cadillac, which housed the Fenix Underground club, it's not safe for workers to even try to restore it, said Cara McDonald, spokeswoman for Goodman Financial Services, which owns the Cadillac and OK. Both wear red tags, two of 16 Pioneer Square buildings the city has deemed unsafe to inhabit. The five-story OK is held up by steel braces to protect the facade, while a tumble of bricks and a cyclone fence mark the  entrance to the three-story Cadillac at 325 Second Ave. S. Neither the Cadillac nor the OK is designated a landmark, but because they are in a historic district, demolition isn't a given. It's prohibited unless approved by the city's Department of Neighborhoods, and the Pioneer Square preservation board must determine the buildings have no architectural or historic significance. That's what the OK developers were trying to do when the earthquake struck, said Karen Gordon, the city's historic-preservation officer. "We clearly didn't get through the presentation," she said. The Pioneer Square community vows it won't lose the two buildings without a fight. "I don't believe any of the community folks I know would entertain the idea of the OK going away," Brunner said. The hotel, at 212 Alaskan Way S., was built in 1914, and with its 192 rooms was one of the largest hotels in Pioneer Square, said historian Greg Lange, a past member of the Pioneer Square historic board. "It was significant because it catered to the transient population," he said, "and really represents an important part of Seattle's history. When you start knocking these down, it changes the atmosphere of the whole Pioneer Square area." The Cadillac Hotel was one of the first buildings completed after the great fire of 1889, in which much of downtown Seattle was destroyed. The 25-cent-a-night hotel catered to men who worked in the coal mines and logging camps and aboard fishing boats, which until World War I drove the Puget Sound economy, Lange said. "The Cadillac Hotel is an important building because it was one of the first completed after the Seattle fire," Lange said, and one of the few to still exist. Most of the Pioneer Square buildings were made of wood before the fire, but strict fire codes were imposed during the district's rebirth and most of the new buildings were made of brick. The hotels remained in use throughout much of the next seven decades, finally closing after the Ozark Hotel fire of 1970, in which 20 people were killed. Many of the older hotels in the area, including the Cadillac and OK, closed rather than go through the expense of installing sprinkler systems. John Goodman bought the OK and Cadillac last year from the Buttnick family, longtime property owners in the area, adding to his list of properties that include the Coleman and Dexter-Horton buildings. Jack Buttnick, whose grandparents built the OK, said it saddens him to think the old hotel could become a parking garage. Gordon, the city's historic-preservation officer, said even with the earthquake damage, Goodman still would have to go through a review if he hoped to demolish the two buildings. She wrote to the company last week asking for alternatives to demolition that could stabilize the Cadillac Hotel. Structural engineers from the National Trust for Historic Preservation toured the district last week, inspecting both hotels, and Gordon expects their report by tomorrow. Meanwhile, McDonald, with Goodman Financial Services, said no decision has been made. "Our position is this is not a financially driven decision," she said. "We're not willing to risk the lives of people to send them into an unstable building. It's a life-safety issue." If the company finds the OK is safe, it will proceed with plans to renovate it into a parking garage, she said. Kevin Daniels, chairman of Historic Seattle and a downtown property owner, said he is sensitive to the economics of recovering from the earthquake. "However, the community as a whole needs to understand that these are irreplaceable buildings. When you start taking buildings out of the historical fabric, you end up with holes in the ground." This is not the first time Pioneer Square has been threatened, Lange noted. In the early 1960s there were plans to knock down 80 percent of the buildings and convert the area to parking lots, he said. But pressure from preservationists led to the Historic Preservation Act of 1966, leading to the creation in 1970 of the Pioneer Square landmark district, roughly a 30-block area north of the new football stadium. The district includes both the OK and the Cadillac, said Heather MacIntosh, architectural historian for Historic Seattle. "Hotels like the Cadillac and the OK were critical to Seattle's early economy, regardless of their perceived architectural merit. Removing critical elements of its unique historic fabric chips away at the place where this city got its first commercial start."       Susan Gilmore can be reached at 206-464-2054.Caption:  photoAlan Berner / The Seattle Times : The OK Hotel on Alaskan Way in historic Pioneer Square is chained and locked after being damaged in the 6.8 Nisqually earthquake.A tumble of bricks and a cyclone fence mark the entrance to the 111-year-old Cadillac Hotel at 325 Second Ave. S. in Seattle's Pioneer Square.
