It's the aftermath of the Quake of 2001, and you're thinking it might be a good idea to get some earthquake insurance. You'll have to wait a while. Standard homeowners policies don't cover earthquake damage, and insurance companies won't sell new earthquake coverage immediately after a major quake, to protect themselves against claims from possible aftershocks. Safeco, the largest seller of homeowners insurance in Washington and second-largest earthquake insurer, imposes a 10-day moratorium. State Farm, the state's largest earthquake insurer and second-largest home insurer, has a 30-day moratorium. Earthquake coverage isn't that expensive, as insurance goes--the average Safeco policyholder in Washington pays $390 a year for it, said Gary Brock, assistant vice president for personal lines underwriting. But it's a hard sell nonetheless. Just 8.5 percent of Safeco's 223,000 homeowners policyholders in Washington also have earthquake insurance, though the percentage rises to 13.5 percent in King County. Safeco did not have statistics for owners of stores, offices and other commercial buildings. State Farm has 449,072 policies on homes and commercial buildings in Washington state, according to spokesman Christopher Carlson, but only 26.2 percent of those policies carry earthquake coverage. Overall, according to the New York-based Insurance Information Institute, less than a third of homeowners in Western Washington carry earthquake coverage. Those numbers are likely to rise. There's nothing like a strong temblor to spark the earthquake-insurance business. Before the Northridge quake in Los Angeles in January 1994, said Loretta Worters of the insurance institute, only about 20 percent of California homeowners had earthquake coverage. After that quake, which caused from $13 billion to $20 billion in property damage, according to the institute, the coverage percentage soared to 44 percent. But the surge didn't last. Some people dropped the coverage each year after Northridge, until today the percentage is back down to 20 percent, Worters said. Earthquake insurance typically covers both structural damage and damage to personal property inside, though Safeco limits how much personal property can be covered. As with other lines of insurance, customers can choose how much coverage to buy and what percentage deductible they want. The cost of the coverage varies widely, based on such factors as the building's location, whether it's wood-frame or masonry, and what type of soil it sits on. Insuring a brick building on silty soil, for instance, would cost more than a wood-frame building on bedrock. Repairing or replacing homes damaged by earthquakes typically costs more than homes damaged by fires, water leaks or other relatively small-scale disasters, Brock said, because so many are damaged at the same time. "There's a surge in demand in a concentrated area," he said, "and you don't have enough of a labor supply, so they can charge what they want, and your supplies in the area run out quickly, so they have to be brought in from outside." Both Safeco and State Farm said it was too soon to say how claims from Wednesday's quake might affect their financial results. As of 1 p.m. yesterday, State Farm spokesman Carlson said, the company had received 539 quake-related claims, ranging from cracked walls and broken windows to buildings so heavily damaged as to be uninhabitable. The company is bringing in catastrophe specialists from Oregon and California to help process the claims. Twenty-six arrived Wednesday night, Carlson said, and a total of 80 should be in the area by today. Safeco said it has brought in 90 additional claims adjusters from outside the area. Swiss Re yesterday estimated the economic damage from the quake to exceed $1 billion, and the insured loss to be several hundred million dollars. Swiss Re is a major reinsurance company based in Zurich with U.S. headquarters in New York. The quake won't, in itself, cause premiums to rise, said Claudette Kenmir of Safeco. More important is how much the company ends up paying out in quake-related claims. "It's like any other (insurance) line," she said. "You look at how much you're taking in in premiums and how many claims you get."       Drew DeSilver's telephone message number is 206-464-3145. His e-mail address is ddesilver@seattletimes.com.       FACTS What to do if your home or business has been damaged by an earthquake ** Review your homeowners insurance to see if it includes an earthquake rider, endorsement or separate policy. If necessary, call your agent; he or she can also tell you what your deductible is, what procedures to follow and what documentation or forms you'll need to support your claim. ** State Farm, the largest earthquake insurer in Washington, has set up a special claims hotline: 800-732-5246. Safeco, the second-biggest earthquake insurer, also has a toll-free claims line: 888-723-3265. ** Get written estimates for any structural repairs. ** Inventory your damaged personal property, including a description of each item and its value; attach bills, receipts and other documentation to substantiate your figures. Be sure to keep careful records, including receipts for any additional living expenses you incur while waiting for your house to be repaired. ** For more information or assistance, call the state Insurance Commissioner's Office at 800-562-6900, or consult       www.insurance.wa.gov.Caption:  photoTom Reese / The Seattle Times : After Wednesday's quake destroyed the outside wall of their architecture office in Pioneer Square, Kevin Eckert and Laura Hafermann finish removing items from the debris yesterday.
