ANJAR, India -- Police beat back exuberant crowds with bamboo canes after they broke through barricades yesterday to greet former President Clinton on a humanitarian visit to India. Clinton held the hands of two children and placed red roses on an empty pedestal to honor hundreds of schoolchildren who died during a parade in Anjar on Jan. 26, when the western Indian state of Gujarat was rocked by a 7.7-magnitude earthquake. "We have a plan to see if money can be given to people to rebuild their lives," Clinton said. A mild earthquake shook the area three hours after Clinton left. No casualties or new damage was reported. The meteorological office in New Delhi said it had a magnitude of 3.8. Clinton has been popular with Indians since his March 2000 visit, the first by a U.S. president in 22 years, warmed up U.S.-India relations. His seven-day visit is sponsored by the American India Foundation, which aims to raise $20 million to rebuild 40 villages devastated by the quake, which killed an estimated 30,000 people and made 1 million homeless. In Anjar, Clinton bowed his head at the empty pedestal and walked briskly toward a crowd of 3,000 people. They shouted, "Clinton, Clinton," and surged toward him, knocking down a police cordon of rope and wood. Police beat them with bamboo canes, and Clinton was whisked into a car. "I'll be coming back to India for the rest of my life," he shouted. In the nearby town of Bhuj, a crowd roared approval  when Clinton climbed atop a makeshift stage of blocks pulled from the rubble of a hospital. At the end of the day, Clinton sweated profusely in the 113-degree heat, his forehead smeared with vermilion powder that a woman placed there as a blessing at his first stop in the village of Ratnal. Asked whether he saw an international role for himself in such situations, Clinton said, "I don't know. I'm just trying to do something useful in a place I care about."&nbsp;Caption:  photoSiddharth Darshan / The Associated Press : Former President Clinton was greeted with a garland and a traditional turban in India.
