OLYMPIA--A month after the 6.8 Nisqually Quake rocked the Puget Sound area and nearly buried his fleeing staff in rubble, Scott Royer says the quake gave his small business an overdue jolt. Yesterday, Royer talked excitedly about finally leasing space next door to expand his Second Use Building Materials and replace its "boring" cinder-block fa&ccedil;ade with a "cool industrial nightclub" look of corrugated metal. "This kicked me in the butt, so to speak, and helped me get organized," he said. Like many other merchants in this state-capital city of about 40,000, only about 10 miles from the epicenter of the biggest quake to hit the region in decades, Royer said he hopes to turn the natural disaster into a business opportunity. Twenty counties were declared disaster areas in the quake, but no place was hit as hard as Olympia. Damage estimates there now reach about $100 million, including $21 million to the 73-year-old Capitol, where massive cracks and shifting columns have forced its temporary closure. State lawmakers have been meeting in cramped committee rooms, and even the governor and top officials have been relocated. Repair work is not expected to be completed until at least mid-April. Down the street from the Capitol is Olympia's thriving downtown--a collection of mostly small, independent merchants housed in older brick buildings made of unreinforced masonry. They may look quaint, but many aren't up to current seismic standards, city  officials said. In the past 30 days, the city has inspected 847 buildings and homes. Many stores were closed at least a week. And now, after a month of repair work and inspections, only one business--Skookum Bay sporting goods, remains closed. No one died, and only a few injuries were reported in Olympia. But the cost of repairs and lost business has hit downtown hard. Merchants say business has suffered because of the closure of a main artery from the city's west side into downtown--the Fourth Avenue Bridge--and unfounded fears about the safety of buildings. A survey by the Olympia-Thurston County Chamber of Commerce found that seven of the businesses closest to the bridge were losing $40,000 a week combined, said Executive Director David Schaffert. Inside the spacious Urban Onion restaurant in the historic Hotel Olympian building, only one table was occupied about 11 a.m. yesterday. Before the quake, the place would have been much busier. "Today, it's a morgue," said restaurant manager Rebekah Stein. Restaurant business is about 80 percent of normal, said co-owner Steve Harrington. When they first opened a week after the quake, few regulars dared to eat there even though it had been inspected by the city and declared safe. Instead of the usual 200 or more customers, they only got 25 that first day. "It was pathetic," he said. "The whole day, the staff was just standing around." Yesterday, Karen and David Hardy said it was their first time in the restaurant since the quake. "The plaster falling off the walls doesn't bother me so much," said David Hardy, pointing at cracked plaster visible throughout the restaurant. "I don't think about it being unsafe to be here," added Karen Hardy. "I don't know what people are staying away from." But they are. "It's sort of been the month from hell," said Ruthann Goularte, owner of Drees, an upscale gift shop in an 1890 building across the street from the Olympian Hotel. Goularte went to a back office and pulled out a couple of boxes full of shards of fine china that she estimated represented about $3,000 worth. She said her business has dropped about 50 percent, a figure other businesses are reporting. Some merchants are using humor to try to win back customers. The Urban Onion restaurant, where employees have been wearing buttons that read "Ask about our aftershock specials!" is selling "Quake Burgers" in addition to its usual natural-foods fare. A few blocks away, Dice Screen Printing has been doing a brisk business selling T-shirts with "Survivor" stenciled across the Capitol dome. The Downtown Olympia Association has been promoting downtown and raising money to help merchants by such things as auctioning off pieces of the railing from the damaged Fourth Avenue Bridge. Mayor Stan Biles said yesterday that things may soon get better downtown. The city, along with its U.S. Rep. Brian Baird and the state's two U.S. senators, has been pushing the federal government to allow an emergency temporary bridge to be built. Because there is a salmon hatchery a mile upstream from the bridge, which crosses the Deschutes Waterway, construction normally wouldn't be able to begin until after the fall salmon run, Biles said. But he said yesterday that he heard the Federal Highway Administration has approved plans to put the temporary bridge on a fast track and it might be done in the next month or two. "That's excellent news," Biles said. While the quake has caused some short-term problems, Biles said it has helped pull the city together. "It has shown the spirit of a small town that is a close community coming closer during a time of need," the mayor said. "People have been patient. There has been no road rage. No antagonism. People have been pulling together."       Seattle Times business reporter Gina Kim contributed to this report.Caption:  photoJimi Lott / The Seattle Times : Ruthann Goularte, owner of Drees in Olympia, shows the remains of several thousands dollars of plates and glassware damaged in the quake.jimi lott / The Seattle Times : Employees of Second Use Building Materials in Olympia, from left, Scott Welsh, owner Scott Royer, Leigha Warner and Creighton Rose, stand in front of the damaged store.
