Rick Friedhoff and his staff inspected the cracked plaster innards of the Compass Center, their Pioneer Square homeless shelter that was rocked and rent during Wednesday's earthquake. It has since been red-tagged by the city as unsafe, and the approximately 80 homeless men who slept there nightly have been sent out to find other shelter--to an emergency cot at Seattle Center and to the Bread of Life Mission, the William Booth Center, the Union Gospel Mission and Gethsemane Lutheran Church. Or to the streets. The Compass Center's west side was cracked and pulling away from the building on the fourth and fifth floors, letting in daylight through the fissure. The creaky linoleum-covered stairwell had sunk crookedly by several inches, and plaster chunks littered the halls. Friedhoff, executive director, walked into an office packed shoulder high with black plastic bags--all the worldly possessions kept by those 80 men. Across the hall, a little radio tinnily played The Beatles song "Nowhere Man." Friedhoff laughed at the appropriateness. His homeless shelter was now homeless. Early estimates of the earthquake damage are high; it will take around $500,000 to make repairs, millions more to bring the building up to modern codes, said Cindy Jackson, the center's development director. Now the center is looking for temporary housing for at least 75 people, at least 6,000 square feet plus office space. The Compass Center sits next to the Alaskan Way  viaduct in a 100-year-old building made of brick and stone. Open 24 hours a day, the shelter serves about 5,000 people each month. About 250 people use its hygiene center's showers and washing machines each day; each meal serves 300. The Compass Center turns away 500 people each month. The center also has housing for homeless women in other locations, which remain open. The Compass Center had been home base for its residents. They could stay at the shelter for 90 days, get their mail and phone messages, maintain bank accounts and cash government-assistance checks. "It's their link to the world, and that continuity has been disrupted," Jackson said. Yesterday, former Compass Center residents had to go to the United Way offices on Cherry Street to cash their checks. But that is only a temporary fix, Jackson said. There are about 2,600 beds for the homeless throughout King County, said Rick Rafael of United Way, which partly funds the Compass Center. However, on any given night there are 5,000 to 6,000 homeless people on the streets. A bed at the Compass Center cost $5; the center was full every night. "There's a severe shortage of beds in the area already," said Rafael. "Taking 80 of them out is a real problem." Yesterday, Chevron gave the first gift of $25,000 toward the Compass Center's fund-raising campaign to fix the building. On Thursday night, many of the Compass Center residents were sent to the Flag Pavilion at Seattle Center, which opens up some of its buildings as emergency shelters during rough weather. Perry Cooper, spokesman for Seattle Center, said it would remain open as emergency shelter until Monday morning, using the Snoqualmie Room. The Compass Center was not the only homeless shelter to get kicked around by the earthquake. The building that houses Seattle's Union Gospel Mission, built in 1924, sustained damage inside and out, with bricks and concrete jarred loose and hanging above the front entrance, which is surrounded by a chain-link fence for safety. The 250-bed Union Gospel Mission lost about 50 beds because of the damage and closed its learning center and its day room, used by 50 to 70 homeless men. People are squeezed in on mats on the floors of the chapel and dining room; others are referred to Operation Nightwatch at 14th Avenue South and South Jackson Street. Shelter and food programs remain intact, but elevators are unusable, and education programs have been shut down. James Jones, communications director for the mission, figures it will take months and $500,000 to fix it all.Caption:  photoAlan Berner / The Seattle Times : Curtis Knight, Compass Center emergency-needs coordinator, helps direct a man to where he can pick up his mail after the red-tagging of the Pioneer Square facility for 80 homeless men.Patrick Patton, a Compass Center resident, is among 80 homeless men who have had to find new places to sleep since the Pioneer Square building was red-tagged because of the quake. He sits in the storage room with garbage bags filled with the men's belongings.
