BHUJ, India--Soldiers searching for the bodies of earthquake victims rescued a brother and sister yesterday who survived 10 days trapped on the second floor of their damaged building, living off cereal and water. "Everyone had given up hope of finding any survivors. This is a miracle," said Bakshi Singh, inspector general of the Border Security Force. The rescue came even as demolition teams were clearing away the ruins of collapsed apartment buildings in Bhuj and other towns of India's western Gujarat state, and authorities turned to the monumental task of finding shelter for 600,000 people left homeless by the Jan. 26 quake. The two survivors were discovered by a team of soldiers who had gone into Bhuj's Karsana neighborhood to help a resident search for a relative's body. Once there, they met a policeman who said he had heard faint cries for help, said Nazim Khan, a team member. The soldiers checked the area and spotted a man waving through the grille of a second-story window of his damaged apartment building. The entrance was blocked by rubble, but 20 soldiers formed a human pyramid to reach the second-floor window, where they discovered the sister inside, Khan said. "I was surprised to find someone alive. Then we climbed up, and found there was another," Khan said. The pair were uninjured but weak. They had long ago finished all they had in the kitchen--cereal--and had been drinking only water, Khan said. The man could walk and talk, but his  sister had to be taken out by stretcher after soldiers cleared the building's entrance. After a quick checkup, the unidentified siblings were strong enough to walk, doctors told the team. Khan said he believed they left the hospital and went to relatives outside Bhuj. The 7.7-magnitude earthquake, which was centered 12 miles from Bhuj, has killed more than 17,000 people, and the toll is expected to rise to 30,000 as more bodies are found when rubble is cleared, said Gujarat Home Minister Haren Pandya. The number of injured was 66,758, Gujarat state officials said. The dead have been cleared from all but three of 400 villages in the region. The recovery of bodies was expected to end midweek. The United Nations Children's Fund said yesterday that as many as 5 million children under 14 may have been affected by the quake. Nearly 25 million children lived in Gujarat before the quake, and children represented half the population, it said. Meanwhile, authorities were undertaking ambitious plans to relocate thousands of people from devastated villages to new settlements, selecting sites and lining up materials and equipment. But first, officials were urging quick action to stop refugees from the quake zone from moving to other parts of the country in search of food and shelter, straining support systems elsewhere. Authorities struggled to pump relief to remote areas, but there was criticism that people close to distribution centers and on main transportation routes were getting most of the aid, while millions of others in far-flung areas had not been reached. Respiratory infections have spread among survivors, but health officials said there were no signs yet of an epidemic. Huge communal kitchens have sprouted up around the quake zone. In Ahmedabad early yesterday, 500 people gathered at a kitchen for breakfast. Women sat on the floor, making fried bread while cooks stirred pots of potatoes and vegetables. Officials said electricity had been restored to 80 percent of the affected areas, which were plunged into darkness after the quake. Engineers were surveying villages in a first step toward rebuilding. For those moving, an estimated 400 new settlements were planned for the worst-affected region of Kutch, where homeless villagers are now sleeping in tents and in the open. Almost 125 international agencies, Indian voluntary groups and individuals have offered to send in money and equipment for the new settlements. Land is identified, and work is likely to begin by April, officials said.
