Puget Sound is not bottomless. But for some 150 years, its bottom has been something of an elusive concept. While about 4 million people live near its shores, much of its sea bottom is well more than 600 feet deep--pitch dark, mysterious and all but uncharted. "We may know more about the surface of the moon than we do the bottom of Puget Sound," says James Gardner, a marine geologist with the U.S. Geological Survey. Gardner is one of a team of federal scientists who this week are using the latest in digital sonar to probe those depths. Working aboard the research vessel Rainier, they are recording millions of bits of data that eventually will become an unprecedented electronic picture of the land beneath our inland sea. Yesterday they surveyed the bottom of Tacoma's Commencement Bay. Today they will explore the Nisqually Reach, parts of which have not been surveyed since the 19th century. Next week they will be in Seattle's Elliott Bay. For this, we can thank Mother Nature and the Nisqually Quake. Operated by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, the Rainier is based in Seattle but does most of its work in Alaska waters. NOAA was asked to do some "emergency" survey work after the 6.8-magnitude quake of Feb. 28. According to geologists, muddy "plumes" were visible in the waters off Seattle and Tacoma immediately after the quake. Scientists worry that underwater landslides may have altered the bottom of the Sound, jeopardizing  ships. NOAA agreed to do the survey work. But to assess any effects from the earthquake, it would need accurate pre-quake surveys. And those surveys don't exist. According to NOAA, large parts of the Sound's "bathymetry"--the depth and shape of its bottom--have not been measured since the late 1800s. "Back then they did an amazing job with what they had," says Capt. Dan Herlihy, skipper of the Rainier. "But the tools were all mechanical, weights on the end of a string." Measurements were taken in long increments, providing little sense of the shape of the bottom. Since the 1930s, sonar has eased the task some. But sonar is limited as well. And much of what is known about the bottom has remained top secret; The Navy, which created charts for its nuclear submarines, doesn't want to share that information with Russian subs. The new technology is "multiscan" sonar, linked to a satellite-navigational system. The sonar sends out a fan-shaped configuration of "pings," recording about 1,000 measurements per second, each with a precise measurement of longitude and latitude. Last summer, the Rainier used its multiscan technology to chart the bottom of Lake Union, the Lake Washington Ship Canal and parts of Lake Washington--all to determine if they were deep enough to bring a giant Navy ship into the lake. This week, scientists will fill in more blanks before heading north for more Alaska surveys. Scientists now have a precise depth measurement for virtually every square inch of the bottom of Commencement Bay. Gardner says he will take the data back to his office in Menlo Park, Calif., and see whether he can determine what might have caused those post-earthquake plumes. "I'm not at all sure we'll be able to learn much about the earthquake itself," he says. "If we see a major geological failure down there, it may be difficult to tell if it is something that happened last month or 500 years ago." Even if he doesn't unravel that mystery, scientists are taking an enormous step forward in charting Puget Sound. That job is likely to remain unfinished for many years, however, skipper Herlihy says. While the Rainier is "probably the most efficient research ship of its kind," it also is the only one working the entire Pacific Coast, from San Diego to the Arctic. Even with state-of-the-art sonar, that's still a lot of bottom to cover.       Ross Anderson can be reached at 206-464-2061 or randerson@seattletimes.com.Caption:  photoLauren McFalls / The Associated Press : The research vessel Rainier anchors in Commencement Bay near Tacoma in its voyage to collect data on whether last month's earthquake changed the Puget Sound sea floor.
