Earthquake insurance for Safeco Field has gone through the (retractable) roof. In three years, the annual premium on a $100 million earthquake policy more than tripled, going from $71,000 in 1999 to $241,000 this year. The deductible also increased, from $100,000 to $11 million in the same period. Experts say the combination of the Nisqually earthquake on Feb. 28 and the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks stung the insurance industry and made for some eye-popping projections about rates for buildings large and small. The ballpark may be only the beginning. Pamela Hughes, the city's risk manager, says she has heard estimates that comprehensive flood, fire and earthquake coverage on the city's 840 properties could go up 20 to 700 percent when Seattle renews its insurance policies next year. According to the lease between the Mariners and the Public Facilities District (PFD), the public agency that owns the stadium, the ballclub must spend about $60,000 to purchase earthquake insurance. But rates far outpaced what the team was obligated to pay since the stadium opened in 1999, and the Mariners have always paid more than they had to. With the recent spike in rates, Mariners executives and the PFD began talking about ways to split the bill. This month, the PFD decided to contribute $100,000 for earthquake insurance. The money will come from the $700,000 annual rent for Safeco Field paid by the team. The Mariners added $191,000 to the PFD's contribution  to buy a $200 million policy, also with an $11 million deductible. PFD board member Bob Wallace said the agreement was good for taxpayers and the team. Although the team is technically on the hook to pay for earthquake insurance because it would be most affected by a catastrophe, it's a publicly owned building, Wallace said. King County agreed to contribute $372 million for the stadium. The balance on the $517 million ballpark was paid by the team. "We could have sat on our butts and let the Mariners pay what they wanted. They would have been at risk, but so would the public," Wallace said. "It (contributing to the insurance) wasn't us doing them a favor. It was doing something that was prudent for the building." Mariners spokeswoman Rebecca Hale said that besides industry-wide woes post-Sept. 11, the Nisqually earthquake shook the confidence of insurance adjusters. The building sustained about $400,000 of superficial damage. Some televisions and bookcases fell, and the brick facade along First Avenue South needed to be patched. The team paid for all repairs because the damage was less than the $1 million deductible at that time. Safeco Field was designed to survive major quakes. The stadium is built in sections that can move with a tremor instead of shaking apart. Just getting insurance at any cost is proof it's well built, said Kevin Callan, PFD executive director. And insuring a $517 million structure for $200 million makes sense, he said. If a quake so devastating were to level the entire building, Seattle would have much bigger things to worry about than baseball, he said.       Alex Fryer can be reached at 206-464-8124 or afryer@seattletimes.com.
