KURE, Japan--Residents cleaned debris from streets and lined up in the rain for supplies today after a powerful earthquake damaged houses, snapped power lines and broke water pipes. Two people were killed by falling debris. The magnitude-6.4 temblor that hit five states in southwestern Japan yesterday afternoon was felt as far away as South Korea, more than 150 miles northwest of the epicenter. News reports said that at least 160 people were hurt. In this town of old-fashioned wooden houses crammed together in narrow, winding streets, people cleared rubble from the roads to let cars pass. Concrete walls were latticed with cracks. About 50 residents lined up outside the city hall for vinyl sheets to cover broken roofs. "I've never been so scared in my life," Hatsue Michinaka, 84, said of the quake as she cleared debris from a collapsed wall. Roof tiles and window shards also littered the streets in the neighboring of Hiroshima, where water was cut for thousands of the city's 1 million people. An 80-year-old woman died in Kure, about 12 miles south of Hiroshima, when she was buried under a collapsed wall. In nearby Ehime state, a 50-year-old woman fleeing her home in the city of Matsuyama was killed by roof tiles that fell on her. Water lines were cut in islands near the quake's epicenter, affecting 10,000 households. It was unclear when water would be restored. In Hiroshima city, the quake set off a fire that burned down one home. Across  the state, three houses were destroyed and several hundred damaged. Train service was temporarily stopped, and the airport in Hiroshima closed for inspection. Telephone service also was disrupted. No nuclear reactors in quake-hit areas were affected. In South Korea, windows shook in towns along the nation's eastern and southern coasts. Japan --one of the world's most earthquake-prone countries--straddles three tectonic plates, the huge slabs of land that cover the surface of the Earth. A magnitude-6 quake can seriously damage houses and buildings. Yesterday's quake was centered offshore and relatively deep, which may have lessened its impact. In October, a magnitude-7.3 quake struck a largely rural area in Tottori state. Though at least 120 people were hurt, none died. Some 6,000 people died when a magnitude-7.2 quake devastated the port of Kobe in 1995.Caption:  photoThe Associated Press : Shop clerks at a supermarket in Matsuyama, Japan, clean up cans of beer that fell from the shelves during yesterday's 6.4 earthquake.
