FORT LEWIS--Work is under way to repair a monument here honoring World War I's 91st Division--the "Wild West Division" of farmers, loggers, cowboys and city boys who were the first to train here in 1917. Workers are shoring up the stone panels and installing new metal supports inside the 40-foot, 71-year-old sandstone and bronze monument, which was damaged in the Feb. 28 Nisqually Earthquake. Fort Lewis officials had feared the damage would be too expensive to fix, but the Army last month awarded a contract for quake repairs that includes $95,000 for work on the monument. Fort Lewis officials are hoping additional costs will be covered by a quake-damage package from Congress. Fort Lewis has reported quake damages of more than $4.4 million, mostly stress cracks and toppled chimneys. "The Army is taking a significant step at making sure that monument is there for the next 70 years," said Paul McGuff, the Fort Lewis cultural-resources program manager. The soldiers of the 91st Infantry Division, the first to train at the new Camp Lewis, left for France in 1918. The 30,000 men saw action in the Argonne Forest, the American Expeditionary Force's largest campaign of World War I. More than 6,000 were killed or wounded. Five were awarded the Medal of Honor, and they were welcomed home as heroes. By the late 1920s, local leaders had enlisted sculptor Avard Fairbanks and Seattle architect John Graham to design a tribute. Frank McDermott, then owner  of the Bon March&eacute;, contributed $50,000 to cover the costs. The monument, unveiled Memorial Day 1930, had been scheduled for about $100,000 in restoration work before the earthquake. The worst damage from the 6.8-magnitude quake is at the top of the monument, which was whipped back and forth and side to side by the tremors. Workers started the repairs April 25. They've removed the three capstones, weighing two tons apiece, and the first couple rows of stone panels. Each piece of rock is being fitted with five-eighths-inch rods that will attach to a three-inch steel frame being installed inside the structure, said Ron Prieur, the fort's historic-buildings inspector. "The fix is actually designed better than the original. When it's shaking now, it's all going to shake together," Prieur said. "This will be even better than it was before the earthquake," said Lt. Col. Frank Galvanin, deputy commander of the 4th Brigade, 91st Division at Fort Lewis.
