A month after the Nisqually earthquake, the Federal Emergency Management Agency has approved $14.3 million in aid to Washington residents whose homes were damaged by the 6.8 tremor. FEMA inspectors have completed nearly 12,000 home inspections in the 20 counties declared a federal disaster area. It covers all Western Washington counties except San Juan, plus Benton and Yakima counties in Eastern Washington. In addition, FEMA is administering a grant to provide unemployment assistance to those who lost jobs because of the earthquake but don't qualify for state unemployment payments--primarily self-employed workers who don't pay into the state program. Roger Haydon of the state Employment Security Department gave as an example a woman who owns her own shop, which has been closed because of the quake. Businesses don't have to pay into the state unemployment program unless they hire someone. In addition, Haydon said, corporate officers can elect not to contribute to unemployment for themselves, and they would be eligible under the FEMA program. Money also goes to those injured in the quake who don't qualify for unemployment because they are unable to work. Regular state unemployment pays between $98 and $478 a week, depending on a worker's net quarterly income. The disaster unemployment assistance is slightly more generous, paying between $140 and $478 a week. The funds expire when the disaster declaration is no longer in effect, expected to be in  September. Workers in eight counties declared disasters early on--King, Kitsap, Pierce, Snohomish, Thurston, Grays Harbor, Mason and Lewis--have until Friday to apply for disaster unemployment. The other counties have until later in the month, but Haydon said missing the deadline won't necessarily prevent workers from collecting. He said it would be considered a late application. "We liberally construe the laws," he said.&nbsp; Benefit information People who want to file for benefits may apply by calling 866-416-7274. The Web site address is www.wa.gov/esd/ui/dua.htm.
