Q: What are the chances that home values will be deeply affected by the earthquake, and when will we know?       A:       If history is any guide, some home values will be affected by the 6.8 earthquake the Puget Sound area experienced Feb. 28, but it will probably take at least three months before the experts can get a handle on what that will mean, says Redmond-based appraiser Alan Pope. So far, he's had no calls, nor has he heard of any real-estate agents getting calls, from homeowners worried that the quake has compromised their home's value. "The only thing I've seen is that for some (mortgage) loans now in the pipeline, the lenders are asking me to go out and reinspect those homes for problems," Pope said. If the results of these new appraisals cause the loans to be denied, and homeowners then have trouble selling these particular homes, their value could be affected. Ditto if a home has suffered structural damage and isn't repaired correctly. Historically, what happens to values after a quake is somewhat hard to unravel. Both the San Francisco Bay area's 1989 quake and the 1994 Northridge temblor near Los Angeles were more serious than Seattle's. Each resulted in lives lost, many homes seriously damaged and numerous significant aftershocks that kept people spooked. Appraiser Teresa O'Neill, a veteran of the San Francisco (or Loma Prieta) quake, recalls she was asked to reappraise many properties. Unless there was damage, their value  wasn't affected. Still, values all over the area did drop in the following months. Was it a result of the quake--or the California recession that was kicking into gear? "It's hard to separate those two things," O'Neill says. In Southern California, former appraiser Alan Klofkorn says the value of some homes "dropped precipitously in the first six to nine months," after the Northridge quake caused lenders to stop writing loans--but just in the immediate area of the epicenter. They've resumed writing them, and today that real-estate market is healthy.       Q: Please tell manufactured-home owners how we can prepare our homes for earthquakes, particularly if they're doublewides and have two sections.       A:       There are no state or federal requirements regarding earthquake bracing for your manufactured home. Your best bet is your manufacturer's manual, says Teri Ramsauer, manager of the state's Office of Manufactured Housing. "That's what you should look at. (It will tell you) what I need to do to secure my home according to the people who built my home." If you have no installation manual, she suggests you call the factory to get one. While you're at it, ask if there's any updated hazard-preparation information. If there's more to be done, you'll want to hire a certified installer. Ramsauer's office can give you their names. Call 800-964-0852.       Q: A few weeks ago you had a question from a reader regarding his liability if he cut down a neighbor's trees. I understand that's not a good idea. But what about trees growing in my neighbor's planting strip between the sidewalk and street? They're blocking my view. Can I ask the city to do something so they don't block my view? I live in North Seattle.       A:       Because the city doesn't have an ordinance to protect views, there's no slam-dunk way of getting city-controlled trees pruned to improve yours, says Nolan Rundquist, a city arborist with the Seattle Transportation Department. "You own your windows, but once you get to your property line you're at the mercy of the neighbors." Here's his take on the situation. Trees in planting strips are the responsibility of that homeowner. However city arborists regulate them all, so owners can't prune, remove or add trees without permission. Thus you'd have to ask your neighbor to do the pruning, and he'd have to get a city arborist's permission. Additionally, about 30,000 trees, mainly along arterials, are maintained by the city. Should the trees in front of your neighbor's house actually be city trees, you can ask the city to trim them. Rundquist would evaluate your request based on "what's good for the tree. If that coincides with what's good (for you), then all the merrier. However typically I'm not going to expend tax dollars for the benefit of an individual property owner."       Home Forum answers readers' real estate questions. Send questions to Home Forum, Seattle Times, P.O. Box 1845, Seattle, Wa 98111, or call 206-464-8510 to leave your questions on a recorded line. The e-mail address is erhodes @seattletimes.com. Sorry, no personal replies.
