AREQUIPA, Peru--One steeple is toppled, and large chunks have fallen from the other. An intricate bell tower lies shattered on the ground. The altar has collapsed, buried under steel beams. In a city that has been named a world cultural treasure by the United Nations for its architecture, the damaged 17th-century cathedral has become a rallying point for Peruvians digging out after a weekend earthquake that killed 102 people. Since the 8.1-magnitude temblor, thousands of residents of this Andean highland city have flocked to the imposing stone edifice. "We Arequipans have a lot of courage and strength," said Jorge Rosada, a vegetable farmer, watching the effort already under way. "I think the entire town is going to recoup its strength--and recover our cathedral." Church workers wearing smocks and hard hats hauled away debris in wheelbarrows with the help of cadets from Arequipa's police academy. "It's a top priority for us to restore it," Mayor Juan Manuel Guillen said. "Arequipans are warriors; we don't give up. We're a little beaten up right now, but we will prevail." Nestled amid the Andes mountains 465 miles southeast of Lima, Arequipa is nicknamed Peru's colonial "White City" because of its brightly colored buildings that sparkle in the sun. Colonial-era mansions line the downtown streets, with Spanish-style courtyards peeking out from behind facades of carved volcanic rock and wooden balconies. But the city is in an area prone to  earthquakes. Before Saturday, its residents had suffered through four major quakes--in 1687, 1858, 1868 and 1960. The church, built in 1656 and known simply as the cathedral, weathered the natural disasters, although it suffered extensive damage in 1868. It also survived an 1844 fire. Luis Manrique, an architect involved in the government's efforts to restore the city's buildings, said every one of the city's 335 historical monuments has been damaged in some way in the quake. When the quake struck, Arequipa resident Augustin Medina watched in horror as the cathedral's steeple collapsed in a cloud of white dust. As the Earth rumbled, the steeple tumbled backward and crashed through the ceiling of one of the cathedral's side chapels. It sounded like a bomb had exploded, Medina said. The building is now littered with mounds of shattered stone columns and twisted steel beams. Deep cracks stretch across its walls. The church's three-story organ, made in 1853 of imported wood from Belgium, escaped damage, but a brass lamp from Spain was damaged. Father Juan Meza said engineers were expected to arrive this week to evaluate the damage and draw up restoration plans. "We won't be able to have services inside. It's just too dangerous," he said, fearing aftershocks might jar loose chunks of concrete and brick. Since Saturday, Meza said the church has been celebrating Mass in its courtyard, where a makeshift altar and electric organ have been set up. Many Arequipans, like Julio Marquez, were confident the cathedral would again regain its luster--in part with the help of locals who feel they have a stake in making sure it does. "Arequipa's artisans are the best. They'll have it looking brand-new in no time," he said.Caption:  photoMartin Mejia / The Associated Press : Two engineers confer near the damaged bell tower of a cathedral in Arequipa, Peru, on Sunday. A powerful earthquake shook the southern part of the country Saturday, killing at least 102 people.
