OLYMPIA--The Legislature yesterday sent Gov. Gary Locke the first bill of the 2001 session, responding to the double whammy of an earthquake and an energy crunch by approving emergency aid to families. The Senate unanimously approved a plan to provide $2 million for an energy-assistance program for needy households and grants for some of the homeowners who suffered property damage from the Nisqually Earthquake that rattled the region 11 days ago. Those state dollars will attract $7 million in federal aid under matching programs. The state share will come from the emergency-reserve fund, which now stands at more than $500 million. The bill already had cleared the House on Friday night, so the measure went to Locke's desk for his signature--but not literally to his desk because the governor and Legislature were evicted from the Capitol when it was damaged by the 6.8-magnitude quake. Locke said he will sign the bill tomorrow morning at the Capitol-campus sundial between the office buildings where lawmakers are meeting in temporary chambers. "I congratulate the Legislature for moving so quickly to help people harmed by the recent earthquake as well as those having a hard time paying record-high power bills," Locke said in a statement after the vote. "This state and its citizens are being tested by earthquake, drought and outrageous energy costs, so I'm pleased to join the Legislature to do all we can, as quickly as possible." Senate budget  Chairwoman Lisa Brown, D-Spokane, said federal, state and local governments have forged a remarkable partnership to help ease the effects of the quake and soaring energy costs that force some families to choose between buying groceries or paying the light bill. Brown was sponsor of a $2 million energy-assistance plan that passed the Senate but languished in the House because of GOP concerns over the price tag. It was her suggestion that a lesser amount be appropriated as part of an emergency bill for quake victims. The House accepted the compromise, and the prime sponsor of House Bill 2222 was the Republican co-chairman of the budget panel, Barry Sehlin of Oak Harbor. "I'm pleased the state is stepping up to the challenge of helping our most vulnerable citizens deal with the extraordinary price spikes we have seen this heating season," Brown said after yesterday's vote. The energy fund will help 2,500 households with their electric and heating bills, she said. That doesn't begin to fully meet the need, but it's still a great help, she said. Quake-relief dollars will go for grants to low- and middle-income families who sustained property damage that wasn't covered by insurance. Sehlin said the Federal Emergency Management Agency already has approved applications for more than $1.8 million, and that could grow to more than $6 million. The combined federal-state fund of $4 million should cover claims for the next 30 days and more funds can be approved later, he said. Helping citizens in time of dire emergency is one of the paramount duties of government, said Sen. Joseph Zarelli, R-Vancouver.
