You only have to look at its nickname--"the island" --to realize how much Seattle's Magnolia neighborhood revels in its relative isolation. That makes visits there, whether lunch outings from nearby Queen Anne or Ballard or evenings out from the Eastside, like journeying to a Rockwellian village of small specialty stores. "People have always had to seek us out," says Ludger Szmania, owner of Szmania's restaurant in Magnolia's prime shopping district, near 34th Avenue West and West McGraw Street. There are basically three ways in and out of Magnolia, but now that earthquake damage has closed one of them--the troublesome 70-year-old Magnolia Bridge--that separation has become a liability. Businesses are suffering. Already-overburdened West Dravus Street has tightened like a lasso around the vehicles that have converged on the route, disrupting routines for commuters and local shopkeepers. Szmania says volume at his restaurant is down 30 to 40 percent since the closure. Commute times for employees have doubled. Most weekend patrons come from Seattle, Mercer Island and Bellevue, but "those people have been staying away," he says. The quake destroyed several levels of diagonal braces along the bridge's west side. Officials say it could be six months before the span, which carries up to 18,600 vehicles daily, reopens. That leaves Dravus and West Emerson Street to the north as the area's primary access routes. But it's Dravus, and the smattering of  businesses that dot the route as it reaches 15th Avenue West, that are suffering the most. Clogged traffic has raised tempers and transformed simple left turns into 10-minute distractions. The city has dispatched police to direct the mess. That pleases Mark Vargo, a delivery driver who has seen traffic back up with commuters unfamiliar with the street's five-way stop. "People are too dazed and confused," he said. "They need an instructor." Meanwhile, Gregg Saldate, who runs the tiny Soundtrack Espresso stand nearby, says his regulars have disappeared since the closure. "I guess they're taking another route," he said. Magnolia-ites have been through this before. Four years ago, a mudslide snapped bridge supports, closing the route for five months and spelling the end of several local businesses. "Any business here has to have business outside the area to survive," said Alexandra Smith, who along with her husband, Michael, owns LeRoux, a 53-year-old apparel shop on McGraw. Traffic is down dramatically, she says, and lunch shoppers who once popped in from other neighborhoods have dried up. Likewise, businesses at neighboring Elliott Bay Marina have found that despite signs on 15th Avenue saying access to the site remains open, patrons assume otherwise. "Last week, we were down close to $60,000 in projected sales," said Troy Hermanson, general manager of the Palisade restaurant. "We're trying to get the word out--you can still get here the way you always got here." The disruption hasn't been bad for everyone. At the Magnolia Thriftway, on 34th Avenue, near alternate route Emerson, night manager Steve Wilson says registers are busier. "I've had customers tell me they're only going to shop here as long as the bridge is closed," he said. The closure should be a hot topic at the Magnolia Chamber of Commerce's general meeting next Thursday, says chamber president Dan Bartlett. Along with commuter and business concerns, there is public safety--during the last closure, a chamber member nearly died after suffering a heart attack and it took paramedics 40 minutes to get to Magnolia. A number of residents are already eyeing one possible solution--a long-closed road to Smith Cove Park that runs from Thorndyke Avenue West, at Magnolia's southeast end, down to the marina and out to the rest of the world. The road, owned by the Port of Seattle, is blocked off now and leased as a storage area to a car company. Bartlett hopes complaints will spur action from city officials, who are already studying the possibility. Still, it wouldn't be easy. Meanwhile, places like Szmania's are reaching out to residents. "We're telling them it's a good time to support your businesses in Magnolia," Szmania said.       Marc Ramirez can be reached at 206-464-8102 or mramirez@seattletimes.com.Caption:  mapThe Seattle Times : Routes to Magnolia. Not available electronically.
