Boeing may never reopen an engineering building in Renton that was damaged during last week's earthquake, scattering more than 900 employees to other work locations throughout the Puget Sound area. Boeing has been removing computers and other equipment from the so-called 10-85 building on Park Avenue North, which was fenced off after sustaining structural damage in the Feb. 28 quake. The engineers, technicians and drafters who work there resettled at Boeing facilities in Renton, Everett and Auburn. The workers were told not to expect to return to the 10-85 building, said Robbi Alberts, a spokeswoman for their union, the Society of Professional Engineering Employees in Aerospace (SPEEA). But John Kvasnosky, a Boeing spokesman, said the company has made no decisions about a permanent closure. He declined to discuss any details. Alberts said most of the relocated workers were understanding about the moves, especially because most of them were able to stay in nearby Renton buildings. Fewer than 50 people were transferred to Everett. Several other Boeing buildings, including a Longacres training center for Boeing customers' pilots and mechanics and two underused factories on East Marginal Way South, have not reopened because of damage. Kvasnosky stressed that the closures have not impeded production or delivery. The company has temporarily resettled about 3,000 workers since last Wednesday because of damage to Boeing facilities scattered throughout the  region. Boeing has made other changes to cope with the earthquake, such as diverting new 757s to Everett's Paine Field for post-factory work. The Renton-built narrow-body jets are normally flown to Boeing Field. But a long crack in the runway at the King County-owned airport is preventing 757s from landing. The smaller 737s have been cleared for takeoffs and landings at Boeing Field. So far Boeing has been able to handle the 757 work at Paine Field. The company also has the option of doing some post-assembly work at its 717 plant in Long Beach, Calif., said Tom Ryan, a Boeing spokesman. In the meantime, all Boeing workers will receive pay for missed or unfinished shifts.
