Only after the dust had settled did Western Washington's environmental police brace themselves. After last week's earthquake, state and federal environmental watchdogs feared the worst: busted pipelines, leaky sewage lines, damaged water mains, dangerous toxic spills. Instead, they found little. "Our toxic-cleanup folks are making calls and site visits, but they haven't received any calls about problems," said Curt Hart, with the state Department of Ecology. "Our spill responders have not been scrambling to respond to problems." Less than a week after the magnitude-6.8 tremor, environmental regulators are still uncovering new damage, but rarely of any significance. "I think it's probably too soon to give the area a clean bill of health. It's such a wide area, it's going to take a while to notice any trends or patterns," said Environmental Protection Agency spokesman Mark McIntyre. "But I think it's clear from our initial look at places we expected to find problems, we just aren't finding them." Only two of the region's several-dozen EPA Superfund sites reported trouble, and neither jeopardizes toxic-waste containment. On the southern tip of Bainbridge Island, cleanup of creosote at a former wood-treating operation at Eagle Harbor may slow after a 40,000-gallon tank of treated water ruptured. Anchor bolts that stabilize tanks of effluent broke, including one that holds 100,000 gallons, but the tanks themselves are fine, said the EPA's Hanh Gold. At the Asarco site near Point Defiance in the Tacoma area, the quake sloughed away a few hundred feet of beach, but a contaminated landfill constructed to be seismically stable "came through unscathed," said the EPA's Kevin Rochlin. "Asarco actually had spent last spring preparing the ground for it by dropping a 20-pound weight over and over for weeks to compress the soil--much to the chagrin of neighbors," he said. At the Equilon tank farm on Harbor Island, a rock wall that for years seeped oil into the west channel of the Duwamish River suddenly began seeping more. Meanwhile, crews were cleaning up a diesel and gas spill that now appears to have dumped only a few hundred gallons onto already contaminated soil--not the 1,300 gallons initially reported, Hart said. None of the spill made it into state waters. The only reported sewage problem was at Seattle's West Point facility, where the quake tripped some pumps and stopped secondary treatment for 15 minutes on sewage discharged into the Sound. The sewage had already received the first round of treatment before it entered the water.       Craig Welch can be reached at 206- 464-2093 or cwelch@seattletimes.com.
