Volunteers were to meet last Wednesday for some preliminary planning to raise money for the aging boathouse on Green Lake. Now they really need to get to work. The Clarence Massart Shell House, home base for scores of teenage rowers who compete on the national level, is closed and surrounded by shifted concrete, cracked asphalt and yellow warning tape. "Green Lake is going to enter a new era now," said Lenny Kong of the Rowing Advisory Council, which helps the city operate rowing and sailing programs out of the Green Lake Small Craft Center. The shell house has been a mainstay of the lake's southwest end since 1950, when the contractor of the Aqua Theater built it at no cost to the city. It housed most of the 40 or so boats in the Green Lake Crew rowing program and is the only facility large enough for an eight-oared, 60-foot shell. Last week's magnitude-6.8 earthquake torqued the house to where Jackie Etsell, office manager of the boat center, could hear the creaking and moaning of wood separating from nails. A center beam slumped while the floor sank about 4 inches. The floor also separated from the back wall and slid toward the lake a couple of inches. A large "G" painted on an asphalt apron leading to the north dock was riven, leaving a 2-inch crack. No one was inside the boathouse at the time. The damage was part of a general wrenching of Green Lake, a glacial lake lowered at the turn of the century for the development of park land on its  shores. Etsell peered from beneath her desk to see a chop break out on the lake's calm waters. A nearby water main broke, cutting off water to the boat center's restrooms. Geologists have since been studying numerous sand geysers that sprouted around the lake's shore after wet, loose soil liquefied and turned to a pressurized slurry. Much of the land around the lake is made to order for such activity. Kevin Stoops, Seattle Parks Department manager for planning and major projects, said many spots around the lake are fill, sawdust from an old mill, even old dump refuse. Boats in the shell house were insured but undamaged. The shell house is uninsured and officials have yet to tally the cost of damage, said Kathy Whitman, citywide aquatics manager for the Parks Department. "We're trying to figure out how to handle this," she said yesterday, "and I don't have an answer at this point." Some of the boats have been taken to the Mount Baker Rowing and Sailing Center on Lake Washington, while others will be stored in a Parks Department hangar at Sand Point. The loss of the shell house has disrupted the training schedule of the 150 boys and girls in the junior rowing program and several dozen master's rowers, said Kong. Members regularly place among the top five in the junior nationals. The program will have to decide by Friday whether to cancel a season-opening regatta scheduled for March 24.       Eric Sorensen can be reached at 206-464-8253 or esorensen@seattletimes.com.Caption:  photoRod Mar / The Seattle Times : Thanks to last week's quake, this large crack now runs through the ``G'' painted on the ramp that the Green Lake rowing crews use outside the Clarence Massart Shell House at the south end of the lake.
