SAN JOSE, Calif. -- The last time two California baseball teams met in a World Series, a deadly earthquake rocked Northern California. Could another quake strike as the San Francisco Giants take on the Anaheim Angels in the first all-California World Series since 1989? Seismologists say another moderate or even larger quake is theoretically possible, with the mighty San Andreas and related faults not far from either stadium. But the chances of a big one hitting on any given day are extremely remote. "It's probably the same probability as people would have given to the Angels winning the World Series at the beginning of the year," said Tom Heaton, professor of engineering and seismology at the California Institute of Technology in Pasadena. Thirteen years ago, as Game 3 between the Giants and the Oakland Athletics was getting under way at San Francisco's Candlestick Park, a 22-mile section of the San Andreas Fault slipped about 60 miles south of the stadium. The magnitude-7.1 quake broke a section of the Bay Bridge, caused a freeway to collapse and destroyed neighborhoods. In all, 63 people were killed and 3,000 injured. Damage was put at $10 billion. The World Series was postponed for 10 days. Scientists say it is likely another big quake will strike along the San Andreas or its sister faults over the next 30 years. If there is another October surprise, fans should know both stadiums -- Pac Bell Park, which opened in 2000, and Anaheim's  6-year-old Edison International Park -- meet modern earthquake standards even though they are built on silty soil that tends to amplify earthquake waves. A pitcher's hit Unlike some other American League clubs heading into the postseason, the Angels didn't have their pitchers taking batting practice until this week. At yesterday's workout, the pitchers took their licks in the batting cage under the watchful eye of pitching coach Bud Black. While the designated hitter will be used for the games in Anaheim, the pitchers will bat in games in San Francisco. "I think all AL pitchers get excited when they have a chance to bat," Black said. "You just hope they don't get too excited, too much adrenaline going. "A couple of them, Jarrod Washburn and John Lackey, have some hitting in their backgrounds. It would be interesting to see Lackey hit." Washburn, the Game 1 starter, batted cleanup in high school and has a .357 batting average in interleague play, going 5 for 14. Lackey, a rookie, went 10-3 for Grayson County (Texas) College in 1999 and hit .428 with 15 homers and 81 runs batted in while playing 100 innings. He had eight hits, two homers and seven RBI to lead that team to the junior-college title. "I'm more worried about my pitching than my hitting," said Lackey, who's never been to the plate in the majors. "But I guess if I pitch well enough, I could stay in the game and get to bat some." Bookmakers favor Angels LAS VEGAS -- The Angels, who opened the season as a 75-1 pick to win the World Series in some sports books, are a slight favorite over the Giants. The Angels were 6-5 favorites over the Giants at most local sports books, which expect good betting on the World Series because both teams are from California. The odds vary at different sports books. At the beginning of the season, the Angels had 75-1 odds to win the Series at Bally's and Paris Las Vegas sports books, while the Stardust had them at 40-1. The Giants began the year at 7-1 odds at the Stardust and 25-1 at Bally's and Paris. Notes •       Jerry Crawford       will umpire in the World Series for the second time in three seasons and will be the crew chief. Crawford, a 26-year veteran who is president of the former umpires' union, also worked the Series in 1988, 1992 and 1998. He will be behind the plate for Game 1, joined by       Angel Hernandez       at first,       Tim Tschida at second,       Mike Winters       at third,       Mike Reilly       in left and       Tim McClelland       in right. Hernandez and Winters will be umpiring in the Series for the first time. Reilly worked it in 1984 and 1992, and McClelland worked it in 1993 and 2000. Tschida's only previous Series was in 1998. • The suddenly historic home plate from the Angels' pennant-clinching game is headed for "Club Rocks." The Angels are autographing the home plate from the win over Minnesota and presenting it to the Edison Field grounds crew. The plate and the rubber from the pitcher's mound in that game will be displayed in the grounds crew's office, under the phony rocks beyond left-center field. The workers call their office "Club Rocks."Caption:  photoRic Francis / The Associated Press : Johnny Ball installs World Series graphics at Edison Field, home of the Anaheim Angels, yesterday. Game 1 is tomorrow.
