SAN FRANCISCO -- San Francisco Giants Manager Dusty Baker figured the 36,331 fans at Pacific Bell Park were too preoccupied with the tight game to realize they had just experienced an earthquake. "They were either too excited or too cold to feel it," Baker said. An earthquake jolted the park during the ninth inning, and Jeff Kent drew a bases-loaded walk in the 11th last night to lift the Giants over the Atlanta Braves 7-6. Baker did not feel the quake. Neither did most of the players. "Really? No kidding?" Giants infielder Damon Minor said when he heard the news. "I missed my chance. That would have been my first one, too." The game was not stopped as glass panes in the front of the press box rattled with Atlanta's Chipper Jones batting with one out in the ninth. There was no noticeable reaction from the players or the crowd. "All I felt was the chill in my bones," Jones said. Moments after the earthquake, the Braves scored twice to tie it at 6. Barry Bonds hit his 580th career home run as the Giants won for the ninth time in 11 games. With one out in the Giants' 11th, Ramon Martinez singled, Rich Aurilia doubled and Bonds drew an intentional walk to load the bases. Chris Hammond (1-2) walked Kent on a full count. Down 6-4, the Braves tied it in the ninth against Robb Nen on two-out, RBI singles by Vinny Castilla and Javy Lopez. The Giants took the lead in the eighth. Reggie Sanders tripled and scored on Benito Santiago's  tiebreaking single, and Tom Goodwin added an RBI single. "We came back, then they came back," Aurilia said. "We just hung in there. Nobody cares about the earthquake. I didn't feel it. I'll hear about it on the news." Bonds' two-run homer, his 13th this season, came in the third inning off Kevin Millwood and landed in McCovey Cove, beyond the right-field wall. Bonds has connected in five of his last eight games, putting him three home runs behind Mark McGwire for fifth place all-time.Caption:  photoDave Kennedy / The Associated Press : Barry Bonds watches his 580th career home run fly into McCovey Cove last night.
