Tomorrow marks the first anniversary of the Nisqually Earthquake, and the date hasn't gone unnoticed. Where were you when the quake hit? Locals tell tales of superhuman strength: how they were able to leap staircases in a single bound. Or how they froze, clutching anything solid to keep from spinning into space. But more than initial responses, what's memorable was the quake's aftermath. Take the scene in the Tacoma Dome. The Mount Vernon High School boys basketball team was playing the O'Dea High team. As the quake subsided, the Mount Vernon band began playing "We Will Rock You." Then there were the bartenders who invented quake cocktails, the Four Seasons Olympic Hotel's Michael Vezzoni introducing the Seismic Martini and the Union Square Grill unveiling the Shockwave. Next, there were humorists like Jeffrey Shaffer, who reminded residents to fill the bathtub with water after an earthquake. Shaffer ad-libbed, "Only here in the Northwest, we fill the tub with COFFEE." And finally there was the Lusty Lady, an adult-entertainment venue that posted this invitation on its marquee: "Come Feel the Earth Move." Dog-day afternoon: A Bellevue woman who walks her dog on busy Bellevue Way reports a recent incident that could have gone either way. She watched a driver stop to rescue a yellow Labrador retriever running loose in heavy traffic. While impatient drivers zoomed past her, the brave woman leashed the confused stray. But now with  two barking dogs in her car, she needed help. The dog walker called 911 and then ran home to deposit her own dog. By the time she returned, two other passers-by had called the number on the stray's tag. They'd identified the Lab — who had tunneled under a fence — as Cathy. Turns out the good Samaritan who risked injury to save the Lab was Seattle Storm star Michelle Marciniak. Food for thought: Chef Greg Atkinson is wearing a new hat. Although continuing as executive chef at Canlis, one of the city's premier restaurants, he's taking on the post of chef and food-service manager at the Puget Sound Environmental Learning Center on Bainbridge Island. The center, which opens this fall, can serve more than 7,000 children and adults a year. Executive director Paul Brainerd said, "Teaching about where food comes from, organic gardening, cooking and composting will be integral pieces of our curriculum." Birdcall: If they don't pick up on the first ring, please excuse the folks at Moxie Media. Staff members at the consulting firm have been watching a bald eagle perched on a tree outside their Eastlake offices. Said one eagle watcher: "We're surprised the bird visits such an urban setting. We know he is looking for fish, but we can't believe there are that many in Lake Union." Vanity fare: Spotted in North Seattle was a lime-green Volkswagen bug with this license: RBT RBT. Jean Godden appears Monday, Wednesday and Friday. Phone 206-464-8300. E-mail: jgodden @seattletimes.com. More columns: www.seattletimes.com/columnists.
