SULTANDAGI, Turkey -- An earthquake shook a poppy-growing region in central Turkey yesterday, toppling scores of buildings and killing at least 45 people, including an elderly couple crushed by falling rubble. At least 150 people were injured in the quake, which was far less powerful than the pair of earthquakes that killed 18,000 people in northwest Turkey in 1999. Turkish seismologists said yesterday's quake was magnitude-6, while the U.S. National Earthquake Information Center in Golden, Colo., measured four quakes, ranging in magnitude from the initial 6.2 temblor to 5. The government said that no one else was believed to be trapped in the rubble and that it didn't expect the death toll to climb much beyond 45. "Because today is Sunday and shops are closed, a huge disaster was avoided," said Public Works Minister Abdulkadir Akcan. The most seriously damaged buildings -- shops and state offices -- were closed. The epicenter was Sultandagi, a small town 125 miles south of the capital, Ankara. About 150 buildings collapsed in the area, which is fringed by the Sultan mountains and dotted with plains that are carpeted by red poppies in summer. The government-controlled poppy industry produces morphine derivatives for use in painkillers. "It was very powerful; I could not stand up," said Ramazan Seker, who waited as rescuers hunted for his brother who was believed to be under rubble. "I was only able to find my way out by touching my hands against the  walls." An elderly couple died after a three-story building collapsed onto their one-story house. Huseyin Seker, 75, and his 73-year-old wife, Kezban, were last seen by neighbors sipping tea in their kitchen. The temblor struck at 9:11 a.m. In Eber, a village of about 1,000 people, 15 people were killed in houses made of sun-dried mud bricks and wood. Of the 150 injured, 26 had jumped from windows and balconies out of fear their buildings would collapse, state television reported. Turks, whose nation lies atop a major fault, live in constant fear of earthquakes. Hundreds of homeless people huddled around fires and under blankets and plastic last night as temperatures dropped below freezing. "We've lighted a fire; we're going to sleep in the street," said Rukiye Gokyuz, a 60-year-old woman. The government -- accused in the past of reacting too slowly to natural disasters -- said it immediately sent mobile hospitals, prefabricated homes and blankets to the region and set up makeshift, open-air first-aid posts to treat the injured. Troops set up tent cities to house the homeless, private NTV television reported.       Information from Reuters is included in this report.Caption:  photoSalih Ozkilinc / The Associated Press : An earthquake toppled scores of buildings in central Turkey yesterday morning, including this one in the town of Cay, near the city of Afyon. Many of the injured had jumped from balconies and windows.
