TACOMA — The rumbling was all too reminiscent. The vibrations were very eerie. The noise was a bit nerve-racking. When Ebonee Newson walked into the Tacoma Dome yesterday morning, she couldn't help but feel a little edgy for a minute or two. After all, she and many of her Rainier Beach teammates were on the court when the earthquake hit the morning of last year's opening game of the state tournament. This time, Kelso and White River were on the court and the Vikings were arriving for Game 2. The commotion? "The Kelso players were beating on the floor, and I thought, `Is this another earthquake?' " Newson said. McKay grows on people Sarah McKay tends to grow on people. On herself, too. When McKay arrived at Eastside Catholic from Victoria, B.C., in August, she was 6 feet 6 and, she thought, finished growing. Think again. "They measured me last week without my shoes, and I was 6-7," said McKay, who wears size 13 men's sneakers. Could she grow some more? "I've always said no, but I just keep growing," McKay said. It's no accident. Her father, Mike, is 7 feet tall and played basketball in Europe. Her brother, 6-11 Chris, is on the University of Montana team. Sarah said she was a half-foot taller than girls she played against in Victoria and wanted to move to the Seattle area so she could improve. "I think that's happened, definitely," she said. McKay played with the B.C. Provincial team last summer and met some Eastside  Catholic players at a tournament in Bellevue. When things fell into place for her to transfer, she chose the Crusaders. First she had "realignment surgery" on her left knee in August. McKay missed nearly half the regular season, sitting out the first five games while clearing a WIAA eligibility hearing and later sitting out four games after injuring her knee. She averages 9.6 points, nine rebounds and three blocked shots. Hilanders or Lassies, they're winning Kelso's school nickname is officially the Hilanders, but you won't hear the girls and boys teams called that very often. The girls go by Lassies and the boys Scots, although the girls team is listed as the Kelso Hilanders in the state-tournament program. But the players and coaches aren't hung up on monikers, especially as long as they win. "We don't care," Coach Ray Berg said. Berg is in his 19th season as head coach, but this is the first state appearance for the team. The Lassies — er, Hilanders — are better known as fastpitch softball powers. They won the state title in 1998, took third in '99 and were second in 2000, all at the 4A level. Meadowdale's Anne Martin played yesterday despite a broken nose suffered Monday in practice in a collision with teammate Ashleigh Graham. Martin overcomes injury Martin, who wore a black eye and a mask to protect her nose, wasn't cleared to play until Tuesday but said she was determined to play in the Lynnwood team's state-tournament opener. The injury clearly affected her shooting — she was 2 for 11 from the field and scored seven. Martin is the only returning starter from Meadowdale's team that made the state-tournament last year. Notes • Rainier Beach speedster Ginnie Powell, the state record-holder in the 100 hurdles and 300 hurdles, said she is leaning toward accepting a track scholarship from USC. • Jason Rubright, West Valley's first-year head coach, is the brother-in-law of Teresa Borton, who led the Rams to last year's title and now plays at Notre Dame. Rubright was an assistant last year to Cheryl Holden, who left to coach Columbia Basin Community College. • The West Valley of Yakima dance team had back-to-back performances. They performed at halftime of the 2 p.m. West Valley boys victory over Chehalis and at intermission of the 3:30 p.m. West Valley girls' loss to Eastside Catholic. West Valley, Mark Morris and Rainier Beach are the only schools to have both boys and girls teams at state. Seattle Times staff reporter Craig Smith contributed to this notebook and can be reached at 206-464-8279 or csmith@seattletimes.com. Sandy Ringer can be reached at 206-464-8294 or sringer@seattletimes.com.
