NAHRIN, Afghanistan -- Land mines disgorged by aftershocks and landslides are slowing aid workers trying to reach earthquake victims in a desperately poor region of Afghanistan. Crews trying to deliver food and tents must now move gingerly on roads once considered safe, the United Nations and private aid groups said yesterday. Other shipments are being brought in by British and U.S. helicopters. "When the land moves like this, it litters the areas that have been de-mined," said Chris Hyslop, an official emergency-program officer with the aid group Mercy Corps International. Yesterday, the battered country observed a national day of mourning as it struggled to count the dead from Monday's quake. The 6.1-magnitude quake heavily damaged nearly 80 villages in a mountainous region nine miles wide, leaving an estimated 100,000 people homeless or cut off from food supplies. The United Nations said the death toll stood at about 600 Wednesday, but the total was expected to rise past 800. On Wednesday, relief workers brought food, medicine and tents to the quake-shattered town of Nahrin, 100 miles north of Kabul. U.S. and British forces dispatched six helicopters laden with California dates, wheat, blankets and military rations. Yesterday, more help arrived in a military convoy carrying medicine, equipment and doctors, sent from Kabul by the multinational peacekeeping force that has been patrolling the capital for the past several months. On a slope  above this isolated hamlet in the hills of northern Afghanistan, where most of the victims died, the dead lay in hastily dug earthen graves. Almost every family in the town of 10,000 had lost a relative or close friend. Almost every mud-brick house had been damaged; many had completely collapsed. Most residents were poor farmers with few possessions except a hand-built mud hut and perhaps a mule. They had endured five years of conflict -- with the men of Nahrin repeatedly taking to the hills to fight Taliban forces before the fall of the militia last year -- and three years of drought, with no rain for many planting seasons. As spring arrived and the town burst into bloom, with apple blossoms and birch buds and young wheat sprouting everywhere, nature had taken a violent toll. Even now, the exhausted inhabitants were not permitted to sleep. Dozens of aftershocks continued to shake the earth; on Wednesday night alone, 10 separate tremors could be felt. Authorities decided to distribute supplies in Nahrin's neighborhoods rather than a central location, but in a country without local radio, few got the word. Many who showed up at the central aid point were driven off by Afghan soldiers wielding long sticks. Abdul Ghahir, whose 3-year-old daughter died in the earthquake, joined the line at an abandoned air base in Nahrin, but came away with nothing. "My wife and children sent me here to bring bread," he said. "What should I do?" Tents and blankets had been distributed to 9,000 families by midday yesterday, said U.N. spokeswoman Stephanie Bunker. In all, an estimated 23,000 families, or 140,000 people, were affected in the two districts where the earthquake hit, and the majority need some kind of assistance. As Chinook helicopters landed among mounds of rubble, U.S. soldiers jumped out and circled the craft as aid was unloaded, providing cover in case of attack. The outpouring of assistance from both the interim Afghan government and a variety of international relief agencies seemed to lift Nahrin's spirits a bit yesterday, and small signs of determination and enterprise were visible. A man set up a table display of soap, cigarettes and flashlight batteries in front of his ruined shop. Women washed mud-streaked bedding and hung it out to dry. Children gathered twigs to make cooking fires, or pulled mud bricks from the ruins to use again. But for some survivors, like 30-year-old Shaima, there seemed little point in trying to pick up the pieces. Four of her six children had died, her injured husband was in the hospital, and their home was a shallow heap of rubble with a single metal bedstead poking out. "I had six children, and now I have two," she said. "I don't know where we will live. The world is dark for me now. It is not day anymore." Then, as Shaima stared at the ruins, she began to moan. At first the words were inaudible, but she repeated them over and over, as if in a trance. "My children, my children," she was saying, and the sound seemed to fill the unanswerable silence of Nahrin.Caption:  photoSuzanne Plunkett / The Associated Press : Children race across a makeshift bridge shortly after receiving relief aid in Nahrin, Afghanistan. Monday's earthquake struck in a desperately poor region already suffering from years of drought and war.
