Thousands of motorists who drive the Holgate Bridge over Interstate 5 will need to find another route. The state Department of Transportation (DOT) has closed the bridge because of damage from the 2001 Nisqually earthquake. The bridge was closed late Wednesday when DOT contractors working on a seismic upgrade discovered that a concrete column supporting the bridge was shifting. "We had a little active movement, and it made (the contractor) a little nervous and they prudently decided to close Holgate," said Ingo Goller, project engineer with the DOT. He said the contractor was preparing to place a steel jacket over a supporting column when he noticed the column was shifting. The bridge, which connects Seattle's industrial area with Beacon Hill, carries about 7,500 vehicles each weekday. Vehicles are being detoured to Jackson and Columbia streets. Goller didn't know how long the closure would last or how much it would cost to fix the bridge. Businesses in the Sodo area say the closure will have a major impact on commuters from Beacon Hill and Rainier Valley. Metro two weeks ago extended Route 38 from Sodo to Beacon Hill across the Holgate Bridge. "This will be an obvious inconvenience," said Mike Peringer, president of the SODO Business Association. "We have an awful lot of folks who work here in the garment industry that need to get home. This bus was a perfect solution to what was a problem for years." Metro said the 38 bus will be  rerouted during the closure and that the new route is posted on its Web site,       http://transit.metrokc.gov/. The Holgate Bridge is one of eight between Seattle and Pierce County that are being retrofitted to withstand earthquakes. Holgate was the only one of those damaged in the Nisqually quake, said Goller. He said the DOT injected epoxy in the cracks of the bridge after the earthquake and that it was safe for motorists. But Wednesday night's movement persuaded the DOT to keep traffic off the bridge. "There's no risk of the bridge collapsing," said Goller, "but we thought it was prudent to suspend operations until we look at it."       Susan Gilmore: 206-464-2054 or sgilmore@seattletimes.com.Caption:  mapThe Seattle Times: Holgate overpass closed - map not available electronically.
