Let us pause to reflect upon the plight of old churches within Seattle's urban core. Because of declining memberships, shifting demographics and lasting damage from the 2001 Ash Wednesday earthquake, Seattle is on the cusp of losing some of its most architecturally inspiring and historically significant houses of worship. It would be a steep penance to pay, one that preservationists desperately want to avoid. In a city where church services often lose out to Sunday brunch, the fervor to save religious buildings seems incongruous. But preservationists say the structures have immense community value not only for their aesthetics but also for the stories of old Seattle that played out within their walls. Two of the city's finer churches face uncertain fates. Officials of First United Methodist Church say they have little choice but to demolish the 1908 terra-cotta domed beauty that brings peaceful balance to the audacious glass-and-girder downtown landscape. On Broadway, the svelte and stylized First Christian Church of Seattle, christened in 1923, has been abandoned, its members leaving to join another Capitol Hill congregation. Leaders for each church concluded separately that the only way to sustain their ministry was to sacrifice their historic building. It's a shame, but a matter of economic survival, they say. First African Methodist Episcopal Church (AME), Seattle's first black church, also could exit the central city, following the same  gentrification pattern that has scattered many of its members across South King County. But a respect for history and a soft spot for nostalgia may ultimately triumph, meaning the church would remain at 14th Avenue and East Madison Street. "These churches are the quintessential Seattle landmarks," said Heather MacIntosh, a preservation advocate with Historic Seattle, a nonprofit organization. "They literally mark the centers of communities past. They represent Seattle's stable, civilized history, which complemented its origins as a frontier and industrial town. There was this other part of Seattle's soul that wasn't about making money. Churches were at the root of that." At Trinity Parish Episcopal Church, an English Gothic treasure at the base of First Hill, the building shall endure, said the Rev. Paul Collins, Trinity's pastor. The goal is to raise $5 million to repair the sanctuary damaged by the earthquake and off-limits ever since. Churches cannot receive federal earthquake-repair grants because of separation of church and state but are eligible if the building is a landmark. Trinity has that status but is unlikely to receive aid because the sanctuary gets limited use, Collins said. The 400-member congregation, which is worshipping in the church's parish hall, hopes the sanctuary will reopen by late 2003. Trinity's building dates back to 1889 and was remodeled in 1903. "Buildings like ours are absolutely invaluable and irreplaceable," Collins said. "They are part of the city's historical fabric. It reminds me of the pergola in Pioneer Square. Does it need to be there? Well, no. But when it fell down, everyone went nuts, and we wanted to do whatever was necessary to put it back up. We often don't realize how important something is to the city until it is gone." In Seattle, personal connections to churches are harder to come by. A City University of New York survey last year found that 25 percent of Washingtonians do not claim a religious identity -- the highest percentage for any state. Seattle has tolerated the loss of historic churches before. In some instances, the elaborate structures have been saved and adapted for other uses, proving a dead church can have an afterlife. Town Hall, an impressive performance and meeting space on First Hill, is a renovated Christian Scientist church. Another example is the defunct Capitol Hill United Methodist Church at 16th Avenue East and East John Street. The 1906 sandstone church was renovated in 1993 by Arai/Jackson Architects & Planners, which made it its offices. It was a labor of love -- but also more cost-effective than building an office from the ground up, partner Steven Arai said. The firm benefits from property-tax deferrals and a federal tax write-off for rehabilitating the old church. "This has worked out wonderfully," Arai said. "The visibility it brings our business is great." The Rev. Daniel Bagley, church founder and the man considered the father of the University of Washington, seems to approve. Arai said Bagley's friendly ghost regularly haunts the balconies. Three of the churches facing uncertain futures have "First" in their names, a reflection of their ties to early Seattle. First United Methodist Church rests in the shadow of the 76-story Bank of America Tower on Fifth Avenue, a juxtaposition of old and new. The settlers who landed at Alki in 1851 established the church. "At the very first meeting at the old church in 1853, 30 people attended," said Steve Poole, the church's communications director. "That was the entire (white) population of Seattle at the time." The downtown sanctuary, which seats about 1,000, once was the city's center for worship, culture and the arts. Sunday services packed the house. But times changed. People moved farther from downtown, and parking became an ever-increasing hardship. Poole said the sanctuary is too large for the 300 or so who now regularly attend Sunday services. The rest of the building, however, gets plenty of use. The church houses emergency shelters and provides rooms for rehearsals and various support-group meetings. To generate income, First United Methodist proposes to redevelop its property as a 32-story office tower with underground parking. A new church, with a smaller sanctuary, would be part of the development. Demolition is at least two years off. "We have had to look at our church's future," Poole said. "Is it to maintain the building, which is historic and beautiful and special to all of us, or to sustain our ministry? If we don't plan ahead, it will get to the point where we have to make the choice between one or the other. Reaching out to the community is our long-term legacy. A building just allows us to do the ministry." But for John Schack, a 27-year-old Seattle architect, the building is a sentimental symbol of his family's legacy. His great-grandfather, James Schack, was its architect. The young Schack recently completed a master's-degree thesis on the church, laying out the challenges and proffering ideas to save the structure. One thought involves wrapping the new development around the sanctuary building -- but church officials say that would impede parking access for the new development. "If we are going to remove the buildings that give downtown its urban complexity of old versus new, that's a deep loss for the city," Schack said. As church officials lay the groundwork for demolition, they continue to work with Historic Seattle to explore ideas to preserve the building, Poole said. "Right now, we're not seeing a lot of options," he said. The story rings similar at First Christian, which sits empty across from Seattle Central Community College on Broadway. The church's final Sunday service was Dec. 30 before it merged with Plymouth Congregational Church, another small Capitol Hill ministry struggling to survive. First Christian was established in 1883 by Seattle pioneer families and moved into the Broadway structure in 1923. The sanctuary is built to seat 800, but church membership was 125 at the time of the merger, said the Rev. Peter Drury, First Christian's pastor. He has hope, but little confidence, the church can be sold and preserved. Merger had been discussed for three years, and $1.5 million in earthquake damage accelerated the talks. The building also needed as much as $4 million in additional deferred renovations. "Our building was costing us hand over fist to maintain, more than $10,000 a month just to stay open," Drury said. "The building is a striking and beautiful place. If we can preserve it, I promise you we will. It has an emotional, spiritual and nostalgic value. People have moving memories of the place. Baptisms, weddings, funerals -- they all have taken place there." Seattle Central looks longingly at the property, taken by its splendor and proximity. But costs to renovate the structure for educational use could be overwhelming, said Jeff Watts, facilities, planning and operations director. "Yes, it's like a castle, and you'd hate to see it disappear but it's a question of functionality. It may be that the church's real value is in the land it stands on. Hoo boy! You start saying that to people and nobody is going to like it." At First AME, the black church, the building's aesthetics are not as striking as its history. The church was founded in 1886 and moved into the current building in 1912. A lack of expansion opportunities at the new location, poor parking and a membership that increasingly is relocating south of Seattle is fueling talk of moving the church. "A building in and of itself does not make a church, but there is something unique about this place," said Carver Gayton, a church trustee. "It's not just a building, it's what it represents. The building provides a connectivity between generations of African Americans, which is important to our community and especially to our young people. Before we decide whether to move from Seattle, we have to understand that this church has not only been relevant to the spiritual history of the African-American community, but also to the political history of Seattle."       Stuart Eskenazi: 206-464-2293 or seskenazi@seattletimes.com.Caption:  photo,mapEllen M. Banner / The Seattle Times : Steven Arai, a partner in Arai/Jackson Architects & Planners, stands in an office that overlooks the firm's other offices on the ground floor. In 1993, the company renovated the old Capitol Hill United Methodist Church, built in 1906. ``This has worked out wonderfully,'' Arai says.Town Hall Seattle, a community cultural center, is located in a renovated church dating to 1922.Ellen M. Banner / Seattle Times : First United Methodist Church in Seattle has been closed since being damaged in the 2001 quake.Trinity Parish Episcopal Church suffered $5 million quake damage and has been closed since.The Seattle Times: Historic churches in Seattle's urban core - map not available electronically.Quake damage, low attendance led First Christian Church to close.
