Q: Why are they closing East Lake Sammamish Parkway       today       to fix a pipe damaged in       last year's       earthquake? Also, why do they have to close the whole road to do it?       A:       East Lake Sammamish Parkway, from Southeast 43rd Street to Northeast Inglewood Hill Road, will indeed close today, at 7 p.m., and will remain closed until 6 p.m. Sunday. And workers are indeed replacing a major cross-culvert pipeline damaged during the Nisqually earthquake on Feb. 28, 2001. It wasn't repaired sooner for two reasons, according to the Sammamish Public Works Department: • The damage was not discovered until last spring. • Regulations under the federal Endangered Species Act require that work be delayed until the driest part of the year to minimize the effect on endangered salmon. Closing the whole road is necessary during repairs near the 900 block of East Lake Sammamish Parkway Northeast because the shoulder is not big enough for diverting traffic. Also, the pipe to be replaced is 20 feet deep, and the large equipment required to excavate a trench that big will take up the whole road. As for the commute, northbound traffic will be diverted up Southeast 43rd Way to 228th Avenue, to Northeast Inglewood Hill Road and back onto the parkway northbound. Southbound traffic will be detoured in the reverse, exiting the parkway at Inglewood Hill Road and re-entering the parkway at Southeast 43rd. Special provisions will be made for local and  emergency access. King County will perform the work under contract with Sammamish, which anticipates reimbursement from the Federal Highway Administration.       Q: Why were so many people getting pulled over near that speed board on Interstate 90 last week?       A:       It was part of a state Department of Transportation (DOT) pilot project designed to show drivers how important it is to slow down through construction zones, especially in light of last month's death of DOT maintenance worker Wayne "Jake" Baardson, who was struck and killed on the job. So from Sept. 4 through last Friday, from noon to 4 p.m., a trailer with an electronic readerboard displayed vehicles' speeds as they entered the construction zone at the Sunset interchange east of Issaquah. Speeding drivers were stopped by State Patrol troopers armed with radar guns and ticket books. On those same days, from 10 p.m. to 2 a.m., the board -- and troopers -- moved to a Bellevue construction zone on Interstate 405 at Northeast Eighth Street in Bellevue. The troopers (who were off regular duty and paid by the DOT to work the construction sites) were kept busy, said Trooper Monica Hunter, spokeswoman for the Patrol. On Sept. 4, three troopers in Issaquah issued eight speeding tickets, six warnings and one bonus ticket to a driver without a seat belt. That night in Bellevue, three troopers issued nine speeding tickets and two warnings -- along with citing one driver for driving under the influence and another for driving aggressively. "When we're in those zones like that, we're working whatever we see," Hunter said. "If someone comes zigzagging through there, we still have a problem." Last Friday was the last day of the pilot project, funded with an $800,000 grant from the state Traffic Safety Commission. Next, the Washington State Transportation Center at the University of Washington will analyze speed data to gauge the project's effectiveness. The project will be continued if it proves successful at reducing speeds. Early warning •       Bellevue:       Starting Monday, Southeast Eighth Street between 112th Avenue Southeast and 114th Avenue Southeast will close for five weeks for construction. Construction will take place from 7 a.m. to 6 p.m. weekdays and from 9 a.m. to 6 p.m. Saturdays. Though the entire section of road will remain closed to through traffic at all times, access to local businesses will be provided at the eastern end of the closure, near 118th Avenue Southeast. Detour signs will be posted, but motorists are advised to use Northeast Fourth Street, Northeast Eighth Street and Bellevue Way to get to Interstate 405 and Interstate 90. City workers will remove and rebuild the roadway, add a traffic signal at the entrance to Bellefield Office Park and the Gateway Building, install storm-water-treatment facilities for water entering Sturtevant Creek and Mercer Slough, upgrade walkways, improve stream crossings, and enhance landscaping and streetlights. •       Bellevue:       There will be other lane closures today on Southeast Eighth Street from 8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., including a lane on the exit from northbound I-405 to Southeast Eighth Street, and a car-pool lane at the Southeast Eighth Street onramp to northbound I-405. •       Bellevue:       Expect off-and-on lane closures and delays this week on Richards Road between the Lake Hills Connector and Southeast 26th Street. Traffic will be detoured east between Bannerwood Park Road and the Lake Hills Connector. •       Kenmore:       Alternating lane and shoulder closures in both directions of Highway 522 continue from 9 a.m. to 3 p.m. today while crews install guardrails on the Swamp Creek Bridge.       On the Road appears Friday in the Eastside edition of The Seattle Times. Send us your questions Have an Eastside traffic question? Send it to the Seattle Times Eastside bureau, 1200 112th Ave., N.E., Suite C-145, Bellevue, WA 98004. Fax: 425-453-0449. E-mail: east@seattletimes.com.
