A massive 7.9-magnitude earthquake jolted the interior of Alaska yesterday afternoon, shutting down the Alaska pipeline and cracking highways and roads. Strong ripple effects were felt 1,400 miles to the south by Seattle residents in houseboats on Lake Union and Portage Bay. The quake was centered in a remote, sparsely populated area 90 miles south of Fairbanks and shook for roughly 30 seconds at 2:13 p.m. Pacific Standard Time. Strong shaking was also reported in Anchorage, 270 miles to the south of the epicenter. No serious injuries were immediately reported and the quake did not generate a tsunami. At a magnitude of 7.9, this was in a tie as the ninth-largest earthquake in U.S. history, according to the U.S. Geological Survey. In Seattle's Lake Union houseboat community, more than 1,400 miles away, walkways rippled, moorings buckled and sewer and waterlines snapped as the floating homes bounced up and down in the water. The quake triggered the trans-Alaska pipeline's automatic-detection system, said Mike Heatwole, Alyeska Pipeline Service spokesman. Operators then manually shut down the pipeline shortly after 3 p.m. Heatwole said helicopters were flying the length of the 800-mile pipeline and ground crews were physically inspecting for damage. None had been detected by late afternoon. The pipeline is built to withstand earthquakes up to 8.0 in magnitude. The earthquake occurred on the Denali Fault and had a shallow depth, said John Lahr,  geophysicist at the U.S. Geological Survey's National Earthquake Information Center in Golden, Colo. Shallow earthquakes generally are felt over a wider area. Waves from an earthquake are similar to concentric circles that occur when a rock is dropped into water. Shock waves nearest the epicenter are higher in frequency, coming in quick succession and jerking the ground quickly back and forth. But as shock waves diffuse through the ground and travel farther from the epicenter, they become more spread out, or lower in frequency. Waves from an earthquake as strong as yesterday's are capable of traveling around the globe. It is estimated that waves from yesterday's quake circled the Earth and returned to Alaska, undetectable by most people, roughly an hour after the ground first shook. The waves -- by then low-frequency waves -- took four or five minutes to reach Seattle. "A person that's just standing around is not going to feel that," said Steve Malone, seismologist and professor of geophysics at the University of Washington. "It's only felt by people in special places." Those people usually are in tall buildings, where swaying is more dramatic, or are folks on the water. In Seattle, yesterday's quake generated a seiche, a wave created by the faraway oscillations, and some who were jolted hardest were those in houseboats along the east shores of Lake Union. Houseboat resident Steve Moe and others had just been enjoying a lazy Sunday on the lake. And then, "It was going crazy here," said Moe. "For anybody who lives in a houseboat, it was wild." Low-frequency waves moving through a confined body of water are comparable to a bucket of water being rocked slowly back and forth. The physical movement of the bucket is small, but its effect on the water is amplified, and it sloshes around. So too was the effect of the Alaskan quake on Lake Union. "If you change one side of the lake relative to the other side even by millimeters, you're certainly going to get detectable motion," said Malone. Some longtime houseboat residents said the sideways, back-and-forth movement -- stronger and different than the boat wakes that often rock their homes -- was the scariest event they could recall. Thea Yeahnakis, 16, was returning from church with her mother, about to walk down the dock to their home. "It was like the whole dock was moving back and forth and moving 5 feet in both directions," she said. "It was really scary and really weird. I've never seen anything like that. I was too scared to go down on the dock." Jay Gelzer was with her eighth-grade son and his friend. The three ran outside when the shaking began so they could catch the boater they believed had thrown up such a horrendous wake. They then ran back inside when part of a houseboat broke off and narrowly missed them. Gelzer's house suffered some of the most severe damage. A "stringer," a support beam that holds the house together, broke. Along with a broken sewer line, Gelzer estimated damage to her house at several thousand dollars. Other residents reported damage to their moorings, broken pilings and shingles. In many instances, though, it was hard to tell there had been an earthquake -- potted plants just inches from the water hadn't moved and even pumpkins still stood atop railings. In 1964, the "Good Friday" earthquake, which left 131 people dead in Alaska, ripped houseboats on Lake Union from their moorings. That 1964 tremor was a magnitude 9.2, the largest on record in the U.S. A 1994 earthquake in Bolivia that measured 8.2 caused buildings to sway in Renton and Boeing Field and waves on Ross Lake in the Cascades. Yesterday, people atop the Space Needle felt the 605-foot tower sway and in Bellevue, water sloshed in the pool at the Pro Sports Club. The Center for Wooden Boats, on the south side of Lake Union, was separated from its sewage pipe. While some local residents were put on edge by yesterday's quake, they weren't going to let it dampen their love of living on the water. "I thought about (moving) for about 30 seconds, but then I thought no," Gelzer said. "I love it here too much. I'll just keep money in my bank account for repairs."       Jason Margolis: 206-464-2145 or jmargolis@seattletimes.com. The Associated Press and Seattle Times reporter J. J. Jensen contributed to this report. Did the Earth move?       The University of Washington Seismology Lab asks residents who felt the quake to report it. Go to www.ess.washington.edu; click on "recent earthquakes," then "did you feel it?" then "Alaska" to fill out the online form.Caption:  photo,mapThe Associated Press:  Magnitude 7.9 earthquake struck yesterday (G54CC88B)Harley Soltes / The Seattle Times : George Johnston of Floating Home Services had a busy afternoon fixing broken waterlines serving floating homes up and down the east side of Lake Union after yesterday's 7.9-magnitude earthquake. (0392575886)
