ZOW, Afghanistan — A powerful earthquake sent a cliff tumbling onto a village in northern Afghanistan Sunday, crushing houses and killing at least 100 people, officials said yesterday. The 7.2-magnitude quake rattled buildings across six countries of Central and South Asia. Reports were trickling in from northern Afghanistan, where communications are primitive and reports could take days to emerge. Survivors in this remote community in the Hindu Kush mountains north of Kabul pointed to the sheered-off cliff that had roared down the valley minutes after the earth stopped rocking. The landslide buried about 100 homes and blocked a river, causing flooding that swallowed hundreds of other homes. Zow, one of at least two small villages, had lain vulnerable on a shelf between two 660-foot escarpments looming overhead. "We all ran," village elder Abdul Qodoos said. "Those people who could not get out of their houses were buried." "It was a big, savage sound, like a woman screaming," Qodoos said. He paused. There was another rumble. "That sound," he said, "is houses, falling into the river." With rocks still tumbling down much of the scarred mountain face and floodwaters engulfing the valley, women and children were moved up river to steadier ground, leaving behind about 20 men. The U.N. World Food Program, whose workers also reached the remote region yesterday, put the death toll at 100 in the valley. Authorities in the city of Samangan, in  the same province, reported two dead there. Seven others were reported dead in the Takhar province city of Rustaq, farther to the north. The quake was felt in Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Afghanistan, Pakistan, India, Kazakstan and Kyrgyzstan. The U.S. Geological Survey called the quake the strongest in the region since another 7.2 quake Dec. 30, 1983 killed 26 people — 14 in Pakistan and 12 in Afghanistan. On May 30, 1998, a 6.9-magnitude quake in the same region killed more than 5,000. Sunday's quake was deep in the earth — making it widely felt, but less devastating than a shallower quake would be, the Geological Survey said. U.N. food-agency workers were shipping in the first aid yesterday — 22 tons of food, from northern Afghanistan's largest city of Mazar-e-Sharif, 80 miles to the northwest. Two C-130 cargo planes loaded with food and items such as blankets and medicine are on standby in Dushanbe, Tajikistan, if needed to provide emergency relief, U.N. spokesman Fred Eckhard said in New York.
