NAHRIN, Afghanistan — Abdul Majid stood in a hillside cemetery, staring at the four little mounds at his feet. "When I look at them," he said, "my children suddenly appear before my eyes." His neighbor Palwasha paced a ruined courtyard with dusty baby clothes in her hands. "Allah, Allah, Allah," she softly cried. In market towns such as this one, the streets are usually teeming with kids flying kites, playing soccer and trailing visitors. But yesterday, there was a strange hush in Nahrin. The children were missing. A day after aid workers and government officials arrived in this earthquake-devastated region of northeastern Afghanistan, there was still confusion about the number of fatalities from Monday's temblor, estimated at between 800 and 2,000. But one thing was clear: Most of them were young. In one village, 20 of the 23 victims were younger than 16. Farmer after farmer told stories of watching roofs crash down on their families and being powerless to dig them out. In another village, six children died in one mud hut. "I would say 80 percent of our victims, maybe 90 percent, were not yet 15," said Sayed Askar, an elder in Nahrin, the hardest-hit town. Children in this wheat- and melon-farming district, 105 miles north of Kabul, tend not to venture out of their mud-walled compounds after dark. When the 6.1-magnitude quake hit Monday evening, most were in their homes. No one knows exactly how many children died. The interim  Afghan government is sticking to its initial estimate of 1,200 fatalities, adult and children, although Nahrin village elders said the total is closer to 2,000. U.N. officials provided a much lower figure of 800 but acknowledged they had surveyed only 42 villages out of 78, in one of three districts affected. "We are not getting the high casualty counts we had feared," said Farhana Faruqi, the U.N. coordinator for northern Afghanistan. "But there's entire areas we still need to assess." The relief effort kicked in yesterday as 200 aid workers busied themselves scheduling food drops, making assessments and handing out the first tents and blankets, using Nahrin as a base. Afghan soldiers dynamited several boulders blocking roads. A team of U.S. Army troops stationed at the Bagram air base about 60 miles south of here swooped down in two helicopters and unloaded dozens of boxes of medical supplies under armed guard. The majestic snowcaps of the Hindu Kush mountains glowed behind them. The earth continued to ripple, and one 5.3-magnitude aftershock yesterday toppled more buildings, leaving some areas of Nahrin, such as Shahr-i-Kohna, a wasteland of loose bricks and flattened houses. Two mosques and the main school also were destroyed. Nahrin sits on queasy ground, and every year, there's at least one earthquake. Earlier this month, a 7.2-magnitude quake shook neighboring Samangan province, killing 100 people. Although Monday's quake was of a lesser magnitude, the U.S. Geological Survey said it was relatively shallow — about 40 miles beneath the surface — and therefore more dangerous. Many countries, including the United States, Russia and Iran, have pledged to assist. More than 10,000 villagers are homeless, and aid officials said a priority is finding them places to live. There are some things, however, that nobody can replace. Every time she feels an aftershock, Palwasha, a pretty woman with rich olive skin and flashing eyes, relives the moment that four of her five children were crushed. She had just laid out a dinner of rice, cabbage, bread and tea when her daughter Selsela, 2, reached for the cabbage. Suddenly, she heard a huge crash, "like a storm from the sky," and the roof of her home cracked open over her head. Her children were instantly buried. It wasn't until she pulled out her son Rohulamin, 8, that she knew that any had survived. "Please, God, let me keep one," she remembered saying.Caption:  photoThe Associated Press : An 8-year-old boy who was injured in the Afghan earthquake recovers yesterday in Nahrin.
