Q: Our condominium is a large one with several buildings. The association is considering dropping our earthquake insurance. What are the pros and cons of this?       A:       Obviously the primary reason to have quake insurance is to pay for what could be very expensive repairs (or even replacement) of your buildings' common structural elements. This is something your standard master policy won't do. Moreover, you can't count on government aid to do the job either. "There is disaster assistance available, but only if it's a presidentially declared disaster," explains Ines Pearce, program manager of Project Impact, a public-private partnership designed to create a disaster-resistant community. Pearce says that in a presidentially declared disaster, loans and small grants are available to repair homes. "But it's never enough," she says. Therefore if your association doesn't have quake insurance, you could find yourself still paying your mortgage -- your responsibility for it doesn't stop -- and your share of repair costs. There's more. Karl Newman, president of the Washington Insurance Council, says an association's quake policy covers the building but not the contents and interior finishes of individual units. You must get your own homeowner's earthquake policy to do that. Newman says it's not uncommon for insurance firms to decline to provide this type of coverage if the building itself doesn't have quake coverage. One additional benefit of having your own  quake coverage: It usually will pick up the tab for you to live elsewhere while your place is being repaired. Additionally, there's another type of quake coverage available to you personally that you might not be able to get if your building isn't quake insured. That's a special earthquake "loss-assessment policy." It covers the portion of the deductible amount you're assessed by your association. Here's an example. Quake damage results in your building needing $250,000 in structural repairs. Your building's quake coverage picks up much of that cost; what remains is a sizable deductible to be divided among all owners. Your share is $10,000. Your individual earthquake policy probably won't cover it, but your personal earthquake loss assessment policy will.       Q: What is the process to obtain an official easement to gain access to a land-locked parcel? When we bought our rural acreage we were misled about an easement. There's a private road that comes to the edge of our property, but the owners won't let us use it.       A:       Attorney Brian Ritchie says there's a relatively simple solution to your problem. Title 8, Chapter 24 of the Revised Code of Washington (the state's collection of laws) says private land cannot be landlocked. Moreover, the owner of such property can go to court to condemn enough of a neighboring property to create a road to get in and out. The neighbor also has the right to be compensated for the land. With that in mind, Ritchie suggests you get a copy of this provision (libraries have the RCW) and give it to your neighbors. Cordially suggest that instead of everyone spending a lot of money on lawyers and litigation, they agree to a deal. They give you and your guests the right to use the existing private road. You in return agree to pay your share of its upkeep. Ritchie suggests you put this agreement in writing. Alternately you can review the Disclosure Form 17 the seller gave you regarding this property. It should tell you if there's an easement and you have use of it. If the seller lied and you can prove it, you have recourse there. If the neighbors aren't honoring an existing easement, you can use this knowledge to convince them to act otherwise.       Asbestos addendum:       A Jan.12 Home/Real Estate article about the in-home hazards of asbestos said there appears to be little danger of Puget Sound-area homes having asbestos-containing vermiculite attic insulation. This is based on common testing methods. However, lesser-used, more sophisticated and expensive testing may indeed reveal asbestos, says Keven McDermott, a manager in the Environmental Protection Agency's Seattle-region investigation and engineering unit. "The normal method for bulk testing samples is not sufficient for detecting asbestos in vermiculite," McDermott explains. That method costs $25 to $50. A test using a transmission electron microscope, costing $125-$150, is better able to detect the carcinogenic mineral. However, it "can still give you a false negative," she warns. McDermott says the overwhelming majority of vermiculite installed in attics between 1963 and the mid-1980s came out of the W.R. Grace Co. mine in Libby, Mont. That vermiculite, sold under the Zonolite brand name, was widely contaminated with a particularly dangerous type of asbestos fiber called tremolite. "If you have a tiny little bit in the bulk product and you disturb it, you're going to have significant exposure," she says. Her advice to homeowners concerned about whether their home's vermiculite insulation contains asbestos is this: Assume it does and leave it alone. Otherwise, "if you have to disturb it, we recommend hiring a certified asbestos abatement contractor," she says.       Home Forum answers readers' real-estate questions. Send questions to Home Forum, Seattle Times, P.O. Box 1845, Seattle, WA 98111, or call 206-464-8510 to leave a question on a recorded line. The e-mail address is erhodes@seattletimes.com. Sorry, no personal replies. More columns at www.seattletimes.com/columnists.
