ANKARA, Turkey — A strong earthquake flattened buildings in southeastern Turkey today, killing at least 46 people and trapping up to 200 students under the debris of their school dormitory, officials said. The death toll was expected to rise, with one official estimating those killed by the 6.4-magnitude quake at 150. Rescuers had pulled 55 children from the wreckage of their school dormitory in the town of Bingol, but were scrambling to save another 140 trapped middle-school students, said Sevket Turan, a municipal official. The Anatolia news agency said voices of the trapped children could be heard from under the debris. Private television CNN-Turk said the four-story dormitory had collapsed. Turan said about 250 students were in the boarding school at the time of the quake. The quake was centered just outside Bingol, the Kandilli seismology center in Istanbul said. Bingol is 430 miles east of Ankara and has 250,000 inhabitants. Bingol Mayor Feyzullah Karaaslan said at least 46 were killed, but Public Works and Housing Minister Zeki Ergezen estimated the death toll at 150. "As the hours go by, the news from Bingol gets more sad. We estimate the death toll to be around 150, and there are about 300 injured," Ergezen said, adding that soldiers were on their way from the capital, Ankara, to help with the rescue operations. At least 25 buildings and a bridge collapsed in the center of Bingol, the mayor said. Rescue officials were still  unable to reach many villages in the area, officials said. Soldiers, rescue workers and ordinary citizens worked their way through the debris to try to rescue students still believed to be alive from the school's dormitory. Doctors at Bingol's state hospital said 14 dead and more than 300 injured had been brought to the hospital so far. Ten were in serious condition, said Ilhan Cokabay, chief doctor at Bingol. "We need every kind of help," Cokabay said. "Medical supplies, people, whatever." The town of Cimenli was one of the hardest hit, reports said. "Everything is destroyed. There are no buildings standing," Nihat Bartamay, who was helping the rescue effort in Cimenli, told private television NTV. He pulled 13 bodies out of several collapsed homes, he said. The temblor also was felt in the nearby provinces of Erzincan, Tunceli, Erzurum, Kayseri and Sivas. Hundreds of people were roaming the streets of Cimenli, and TV footage showed dozens of mud homes destroyed. "The quake lasted 17 seconds and we think that it was a quake which could cause considerable damage," Gulay Barbarasoglu, head of the observatory, told Turkish state television. A number of strong aftershocks struck the area, including one with a magnitude 5, NTV reported.
