CELTIKSUYU, Turkey — Pausing now and then to listen for small voices, rescuers frantically searched for children buried in the rubble of their dormitory after an earthquake struck southeastern Turkey yesterday. At least 100 people were killed and 1,000 injured. Search teams were in contact with four children, state-owned TRT television reported from the scene, but there was little sign of 83 other children trapped in the collapsed, four-story building. "It's a race against time. I fear many may not make it," said Selahattin Bulut, head of the rescue team. "Look at this building. It's no different from a gozleme," or Turkish pancake, he said pointing to the remains of the four-story building. Some parents were giving up hope. Cevriye Bartir, the mother of missing Sinan, 15, sat on the step of a firetruck wailing, "My dead son, let me be sacrificed instead." The 198 students in the dorm, ages 7 to 16, were asleep when the quake, which measured 6.4 on the Richter scale, struck early and caused the building to collapse. At least 15 were killed, along with a teacher. But 96 others were pulled out alive. Steel bunk beds and steel closets helped hold up walls, saving many lives, rescuers said. Soldiers, rescuers and ordinary citizens lifted huge concrete slabs with cranes and jackhammers in a search for survivors. Some just used their bare hands. Every now and then, noisy equipment was turned off to allow rescuers to listen for voices. Dogs also  sniffed for survivors. The quake was centered just outside Bingol, a city of 250,000 in a largely rural area mostly inhabited by Kurds. The school was intended for the children of poor farmers from villages that have no schools. Relatives rushed toward soldiers every time a rescued child was carried out on a stretcher. Many students were being treated for their injuries on mattresses laid out near the flattened building. Naim Gencgul, 15, was pulled out of the rubble with a broken arm. "The whole building was on top of me. We all started screaming," he said. In Bingol, a bridge and at least 25 buildings collapsed, Mayor Feyzullah Karaaslan said. Damage could be seen throughout the city, where the streets were filled with terrified residents. Many said officials had not learned any lessons from past earthquakes because shoddily constructed buildings like the dormitory were allowed to stand in the quake-prone region. Thousands of buildings collapsed when two massive earthquakes struck western Turkey in 1999 and killed about 18,000 people. "This is a death trap, not a dormitory," said Serhat Ketenalp, a farmer from the neighboring village of Garipkoy, who was awaiting word of his 13-year-old son. Like many, he blamed shoddy construction materials for the destruction. "This is not cement, this is sand," he said running a fistful of powdery debris through his fingers. "The people who built this should be hanged." Cowboy contractors and corrupt government officials, who issued them licenses, were largely blamed for the high death toll in the 1999 quakes. Prime Minister Recep Tayyip Erdogan, who traveled to the region, said about 100 people were killed in the quake. He said the government would investigate those responsible for the dormitory's construction. "The guilty will be prosecuted," he said. Some Cabinet ministers said politicians had to accept part of the responsibility for the building's collapse. "We are responsible of the deaths, and we need to take measures," Culture Minister Erkan Mumcu said. More than 200 aftershocks hit the region, for years the scene of fierce fighting between the Turkish army and Kurdish autonomy-seeking rebels. Earthquakes are frequent in Turkey, which lies on the active North Anatolian fault. A 1971 quake in Bingol killed 900. Information from the Los Angeles Times is included in this report.Caption:  photoThe Associated Press : A student gestures while rescuers try to get him out from under the remains of a four-story school dormitory in Bingol, Turkey. (0393087911)The Associated Press: Turkey quake (G4IFCUQQ)Sabit Cekin / The Associated Press : People walk past a building damaged in yesterday's earthquake in Bingol, Turkey. At least 100 people were killed and 1,000 injured. The quake was centered just outside Bingol, where a bridge and at least 25 buildings collapsed. (0393087651)
