TOKYO — A magnitude 8.0 earthquake rocked Japan's northern island of Hokkaido early today, injuring more than 243 people, knocking out power, derailing a train and touching off an industrial fire. The temblor forced the evacuation of 41,000 people and left 16,000 homes blacked out. There were no immediate reports of quake-caused deaths. The government warned residents to avoid coastal areas due to the possibility of tsunamis, ocean waves caused by seismic activity. The meteorological agency said tsunamis as high as 3 feet hit the city of Kushiro, about 510 miles north of Tokyo. There were no reports of damage. The quake struck at 4:50 a.m., cracking roads, capsizing fishing boats and causing the roof of a local airport to partially cave in. The temblor was centered in the Pacific Ocean about 60 miles off Hokkaido's eastern shore, Japan's Central Meteorological Agency said. An earthquake of 8.0 magnitude is capable of causing tremendous damage. The meteorological agency said the earthquake was centered 36 miles under the seabed. An aftershock of magnitude 7 followed shortly after 6 a.m., the U.S. Geological Survey said from Golden, Colo. Another aftershock was reported at 8 a.m., but its magnitude was not immediately known. Television footage showed an office where books were knocked off shelves, and desks and computers swayed back and forth as the quake hit. Merchandise fell off store shelves and people in schools sought shelter. Japan's  public broadcaster NHK reported that most of the injuries were caused by falling shelves and other toppled objects. One 70-year-old woman suffered a broken leg while trying to leave her house through a window, it said. A fire started at an industrial plant in the city of Tomakomai, but no workers were reported injured, said Hokkaido prefectural police official Kuniyoshi Omori. NHK showed giant flames and black plumes of smoke pouring from the site, which police said belonged to Idemitsu Co. Streams of water were aimed at the flames. NHK said a man cleaning up broken glass in a street was hit by a car and died. Japan is one of the world's most earthquake-prone countries. It sits atop four tectonic plates, slabs that move across the Earth's surface. Tokyo is particularly vulnerable. A quake and subsequent fire in 1923 killed more than 140,000 people in the capital area, and experts believe Tokyo is overdue for another major jolt. In January 1995, a magnitude 7.2 temblor in Kobe killed more than 6,000 people. Yesterday's quake struck about 65 miles south-southwest of Kushiro and 495 miles north-northeast of Tokyo, said John Minsch, a U.S. Geological Survey geophysicist. The quake was shallow. "That makes it more likely to be a tsunami, and there's most likely to be a great amount of damage," Minsch said.Caption:  photo,mapKyodo News / via The Associated Press : Workers clear debris after part of the airport's roof came down in Kushiro. That port city later experienced 3-foot tsunami waves, which are generated by seismic activity. (0393500597)Akita Ohno / The Associated Press : Fishing boats sit on land after being carried by a post-quake tsunami that struck Toyokoro, a town on the island of Hokkaido. Residents were warned that tsunamis are possible for the next few days. (0393500989)The Seattle Times:  Japan's Hokkaido island (GJIHP8LD)
