ROUIBA, Algeria, — Algeria's deadliest earthquake in years struck the capital and nearby towns yesterday, killing more than 530 people and injuring nearly 5,000. Shocked residents in the city of Rouiba hunted frantically through the night for loved ones amid the rubble from the quake, which had a preliminary magnitude of 6.7. The earth shook at 7:44 p.m. local time, when many families were gathered at home for dinner. It knocked out electricity in some neighborhoods of the capital Algiers, causing panic throughout the city. About 10 aftershocks rippled through Algiers and towns to the east, closer to the epicenter, along the populous Mediterranean coastal strip of this North African nation. The U.S. Geological Survey's National Earthquake Information Center said the epicenter was 45 miles east of Algiers, the capital, and six miles below ground. It was felt as far away as Spain. In Rouiba, a relatively prosperous city 20 miles from the eastern suburbs of Algiers, one building after another was reduced to a pile of rubble in a scene of utter devastation. Also badly hit was the coastal city of Boumerdes — where media reports spoke of people jumping from windows as they tried to save themselves. State television also said a small hospital had collapsed in Boumerdes, but gave few details. Most of Algeria's 32 million people live in the north, away from the desert. Algiers alone is home to at least 2.6 million. Hospitals in the capital and  hardest-hit cities were finding it hard to cope with the number of casualties pouring in, medical staff said. At Algiers' principal Mustapha hospital, families gathered to ask about the fate of loved ones. Police forced back the crowd. Algerian television showed dozens of bodies lined up under sheets and blankets, some clearly children. Communication lines, including mobile phones, were working only erratically, and were jammed by families trying to find out if their loved ones were alive. Prime Minister Ahmed Ouyahia told state radio that security forces were on alert to stop looting in a country riven by a decade of violence by Islamist rebels. More than 100,000 have died and the economy has suffered despite hefty export earnings from natural gas and oil. A spokesman for the Geological Survey said the quake was the biggest to hit the North African country since 1980, when a tremor measuring 7.7 killed at least 4,500 people in the west.Caption:  mapThe Associated Press: Quake rocks Algeria (G0OFO1F4)
