KERMAN, Iran — Entire blocks of buildings lay crushed and survivors lined up blanket-wrapped bodies in the street after a devastating earthquake leveled nearly three-quarters of the Iranian city of Bam yesterday. The preliminary death toll rose to 20,000, the Interior Ministry said, and rescue crews said it could go higher. Officials said an accurate count was impossible with many victims still trapped under the rubble, and early death-toll estimates have fluctuated greatly. An exact toll is not expected until much later because of the scope of the tragedy and the difficulty that Iranian rescue crews have had in getting to the area. But the Interior Ministry released a statement saying the early estimate was 20,000 people. It said 30,000 people were injured. The statement was broadcast on state television. "The disaster is far too huge for us to meet all of our needs," President Mohammad Khatami said. "However, all the institutions have been mobilized." Two senior officials involved in the relief operation said they feared the final toll from the quake could be 40,000 dead. The leader of a relief team, Ahmad Najafi, said 40,000 dead was his estimate of the final toll. He said in one street alone in Bam today, 200 bodies had been extracted from the rubble in one hour's work. A government official agreed. "As more bodies are pulled out, we fear that the death toll may reach as high as 40,000," said Akbar Alavi, the governor of Kerman city, the local  provincial capital. "An unbelievable human disaster has occurred." The quake also destroyed about 80 percent of Bam's landmark: a giant medieval fortress complex of towers, domes and walls, all made of mud brick, overlooking a walled Old City, parts of which date back 2,000 years. TV images showed the highest part of the fort, including its distinctive square tower, crumbled like a sandcastle down the side of the hill, though some walls remained. The government asked for international assistance, particularly search-and-rescue teams. The United States promised to send aid, as did numerous European nations. Iran's Red Crescent, the Islamic equivalent of the Red Cross, said rescue-and-relief teams had been sent to Bam from numerous provinces, including Tehran. Bam Gov. Ali Shafii said: "The entire town will need to be rebuilt. You look everywhere, you will see piles of rubble and ... many of the bodies are still under the rubble. People are suffering from cold, and there is an immediate need for tents, medicines, food." By last night, little outside relief was seen in Bam, a city of 80,000 in southeastern Iran. With temperatures dropping to 21 degrees, survivors built bonfires in the rubble-strewn streets to keep warm, many shivering in their nightclothes, the only ones they had after the predawn quake. After two hospitals in the area collapsed — killing many employees — military transport planes had to evacuate many injured for treatment to the provincial capital, Kerman, and elsewhere. At least four C-130s had ferried out injured so far, Interior Minister Abdolvahed Mousavi Lari said. At Bam's only cemetery, about 1,000 people wailed and beat their chests and heads over some 500 corpses as a bulldozer dug a trench for a mass grave. "This is the Apocalypse. There is nothing but devastation and debris," a man in his 30s said at the cemetery, where he had brought the bodies of his wife and 4-year-old daughter. "Last night before she went to sleep, she made me a drawing and kissed me four times," he said of his daughter, whose body he held. "When I asked, `Why four kisses?' she said, `Maybe I won't see you again, Papa,' " he said, tears steaming. The quake struck at 5:28 a.m., while many were asleep. The Islamic Republic News Agency put the magnitude at 6.3; the U.S. Geological Survey measured it at 6.5. Iranian TV showed entire neighborhoods collapsed. On one street, only a wall and the trees were standing. People carried away the injured, while others sat sobbing next to blanket-covered corpses. Lari, the interior minister, said 70 percent of residential Bam had been destroyed, and there were no electricity, water or telephone lines. The quake's epicenter was outside Bam, and nearby villages also were damaged in the region, which is home to about 230,000 people and is about 630 miles southeast of the capital, Tehran. In Iran, quakes of more than magnitude 5 are usually deadly because most buildings are adobe and not built to withstand earthquakes, even though the country sits on several major fault lines and temblors are frequent. Khatami declared three days of mourning. "God willing, we will try even harder to meet your needs," he said in a phone call to Kerman's governor that was aired on television. Iranians mobilized to help. In Tehran, volunteers jammed a blood donation center. In Fars province, the government asked for donations of blankets and food and for volunteers to head to Bam to help in relief work. Iran has a history of earthquakes that kill thousands of people, including one of magnitude 7.3 that killed about 50,000 people in northwestern Iran in 1990. President Bush said the United States will offer humanitarian aid to Iran, although the two nations have had no diplomatic relations since the 1979 Islamic Revolution. From his ranch in Crawford, Texas, Bush said: "We are greatly saddened by the loss of life, injuries and widespread damage to this ancient city." The U.N. Disaster Management Team in Tehran will send 36 to 40 tons of relief items such as tents, blankets, water-purification units and trauma kits, said Madeleine Moulin-Acevedo, a U.N. official in Geneva. Material from The Washington Post and Los Angeles Times is included in this report.Caption:  photo,mapAtta Kenare / AFP/Getty Images : Bam's medieval fortress was heavily damaged in the quake. The citadel, made of mud bricks, clay, straw and the trunks of palm trees, was the largest mud-brick structure in the world. (0393756792)The Associated Press: Magnitude 6.5 quakeThe Associated Press: Iran's deadliest earthquakes(GT2JDDRL)The Associated Press : An Iranian mother and her child sob amid the ruins left by the earthquake that wrecked Bam yesterday. The 6.5-magnitude quake also ruined a key landmark. (0393755823)(GT2JDDHQ)
