KUSHIRO, Japan — The violent jolt threw Sachiko Katsuta back into bed when she tried to go downstairs to her restaurant, where dozens of rice bowls had crashed to the floor. Yet within hours of yesterday's predawn earthquake — the world's most powerful in 2-1/2 years — she and other residents of Japan's northern island of Hokkaido were counting themselves lucky and resuming life as usual. Damage from the magnitude-8 quake was relatively light, not only because it struck deep under the ocean but also because people in this quake-prone region were prepared. Power and water resumed after several hours. And of more than 400 injuries, most were minor. "I thought for sure this was the big one," Katsuta said. "But it looks like we got by with just a few broken dishes and windows." There were no reports of deaths directly caused by the temblor, which struck at 4:50 a.m. Two fishermen were missing, and police suspected they may have been swept away by tsunamis, or ocean waves, that followed. A wide swath of the island suffered damage: The quake buckled roads, capsized fishing boats, and caved in part of the ceiling of the airport in Kushiro, 560 miles northeast of Tokyo. The city of 190,000 people was believed to be one of the hardest hit, with power outages reported. In Tomakomai, 188,700 barrels of crude oil burned in a tank fire. Still, experts said damage was moderate considering the size of the quake. It had an epicenter 26 miles beneath the ocean  floor off Hokkaido's coast, and produced horizontal shaking rather than a vertical bounce. "My first reaction was that the damage was much smaller than what earthquakes of that magnitude are capable of doing," said Yasuhiro Umeda, a seismologist at the Disaster Prevention Research Institute at Kyoto University. Umeda said the swaying yesterday was less violent than would have been expected but was felt across a wider area. He also credited the region's experience with strong temblors as helping to prevent a disaster. Residents were shaken but stayed calm despite some 25 aftershocks — at least one registering 7.1-magnitude — that hit intermittently throughout the day. A few scattered buildings collapsed, but most buildings were constructed to withstand the rocking. "We've had earthquakes here for as long as I can remember. For this one, I stayed in bed and put the covers over my head," said Kaori Maeda, 53, who cares for the elderly. "You're better off not trying to run around." Hokkaido government official Takeshi Matsumura said 455 people were confirmed injured late yesterday. Most suffered minor scrapes caused by broken glass and falling objects or hurt themselves trying to flee. As many as 28 were seriously hurt, mostly with broken bones.
