MEXICO CITY -- An earthquake of 7.8 magnitude ripped across Mexico last night, killing at least 21 people, shaking buildings, rattling nerves and sending terrified residents into the streets of the nation's capital. The heaviest damage was thought to have occurred in the states of Colima, Puebla, Tlaxcala and Jalisco, but specific reports were hindered because phone lines were overloaded. Colima Gov. Fernando Moreno Pena said nine people died in the capital city of Colima and 10 others elsewhere in his state as houses collapsed. He said dozens more were injured. Emergency workers said they could barely cope with the casualties in Colima, a city of about 125,000 people. "We don't have electricity. We don't have medicine. We don't have anything," Red Cross volunteer Marta Requena said by telephone. In neighboring Jalisco state, civil-defense authorities said an 85-year-old woman in the town of Zapotitlan died after she rushed out of her house and was crushed by a falling wall. A 1-year-old girl also died in Zapotitlan. Butch Kinerney, a spokesman for the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), said scientists calculated the magnitude of the 45-second quake at 7.8 and said it was followed by an aftershock of between 3 and 4 magnitude. Mexico's national seismological service said the quake struck at 8:07 p.m. in Colima, a small state that includes the resort port city of Manzanillo, roughly 300 miles west of Mexico City. "There are general reports of damage  from the states of Colima, Michoacan and Jalisco," Kinerney said. "Because of the size of the earthquake and its shallow depth, USGS is expecting substantial damage." Colima is in the shadow of an active volcano called the Volcano of Fire, which has erupted more than 40 times since 1576. The last major quake there struck Manzanillo on Oct. 9, 1995, and measured 7.1 on the Richter scale. It killed at least 55 people, most of them buried under hotel rubble. In Guadalajara, Jalisco's capital and Mexico's second-largest city, authorities said the quake destroyed 40 homes and left more than 100 people homeless. Doctors treated dozens of people for panic attacks. President Vicente Fox ordered the military to search for damage. The president's office, however, said an early inspection found only power outages. In Mexico City, where an 8.2-magnitude earthquake in 1985 killed 10,000 people and destroyed a large part of the city, residents last night ran out of their homes, offices and restaurants in terror. Police cars drove slowly through the streets of Mexico City with sirens flashing, as officers asked people over loudspeakers: "Is everything OK?" Yesterday's temblor unleashed instant memories of the devastating 1985 quake, and although no injuries were reported in the capital, there were numerous psychological casualties. "It was horrible, frightening," said Carla Medina, who works on the 13th floor of an office tower in the city's historic center. "The building started to shake back and forth. Then the alarm sounded and the electricity went off. The shaking was tremendous."       Compiled from The Associated Press, Los Angeles Times, Reuters and Knight Ridder Newspapers reports.Caption:  mapThe Seattle Times: 7.8 quake centered near the Pacific coast in the area of Colina. (GI3DL2AP)
