RENO, Nev. — Civil engineers revved up a new earthquake simulator yesterday at the University of Nevada, Reno, which they say gives the school an unmatched ability in the United States to test innovations key to preparing for the temblors. The addition to a lab on the Reno campus is an internationally significant development that moves scientific researchers closer to their dream of creating "earthquakes on demand," said Ian Buckle, a New Zealander who directs UNR's Center for Civil Engineering Earthquake Research. "It is a great day for everybody around the world who lives in an earthquake-prone area," Buckle said. The new hydraulic "shake table" is the third at the lab, allowing earthquake simulations on up to 150 tons of bridge spans or construction materials — more capacity than any other U.S. facility, said Ted Batchman, dean of UNR's College of Engineering. "What we don't know about earthquakes, I'm afraid, is a great deal. What we do know is very little," Buckle said. "In this day of laptop computers, cellphones and miracle drugs, people ask, `Why is progress so slow in addressing earthquake problems?' " The main reason is that large earthquakes are infrequent, Buckle said. "It's not until the next big earthquake that we find today's innovation is tomorrow's mistake," Buckle said. "If we had a big earthquake every week, we certainly would address it faster. If we could make earthquakes at will, we could refine, test, build again," he  said. "The progress would be faster ... if only we could have earthquakes on demand." Buckle said another hurdle is that engineers are leery of innovation when so many lives are at stake. "The engineering profession is a very conservative group. If someone comes along with a bright idea, we may wait many years for it to be adopted," he said. The "shake tables" help accelerate the process, allowing researchers to simulate earthquakes. Sen. Harry Reid, D-Nev., whose name is on the lab that did design tests on the new Oakland Bay Bridge among others, was on hand yesterday to push the button that launched a simulated quake on one of the large hydraulically powered platforms holding a 60-foot bridge span. In one experiment, one table shook violently, causing 3-foot-tall blocks representing buildings to fall. In another, clear storage containers with red-colored water were used to demonstrate the difference in the effects of an earthquake at ground level compared with a bridge with footings separated from the ground by rubber isolators or other insulation. "In a perfect situation, the water in the bucket on top of the bridge would remain silent while the water on the table sloshes violently," Buckle said. In the experiment, the water sloshed over the 3-foot-high sides of the bucket on the shake table, but rolled back and forth only a few inches above the original water line in the tub atop the bridge. "So you see, up on top it's a relatively smooth ride," Buckle said. Reid said he traveled to Armenia to witness the disastrous effects of large earthquakes, which each year kill an average of 12,000 people worldwide and cause $4.4 billion in damage. "The work being done here is not just for inquisitive minds of scientists ... but also to protect us," Reid said. "The work we do here is going to save lives and already has saved lives." UNR President John Lilly said the earthquake program is one of the school's top programs and he wants to do more to promote it.
