BAM, Iran — As search crews despaired of finding more survivors from Iran's devastating earthquake, yesterday brought some joy: Rescuers pulled a girl out alive from the rubble of her caved-in house, there was news of the unlikely survival of a 6-month-old rescued over the weekend, and five men believed dead stirred in their burial shrouds. Searchers needed moments of hope. More than 25,000 bodies have been retrieved since Friday's 6.6-magnitude quake shook the ancient city of Bam and its surrounding region in southeastern Iran, according to provincial government spokesman Asadollah Iranmanesh. There were fears the toll could rise as high as 40,000. "Many, many more people remain buried under the rubble," Iranmanesh said. Yesterday marked the passing of the critical mark of 72 hours after the quake, the longest period people are expected to survive in rubble. Occasionally, people last longer if they are trapped in a pocket with air to breathe, though Bam's traditional architecture sharply limited that possibility. The city's mud-brick houses, constructed without supporting metal or wooden beams, crumbled into small chunks and powder-like dust. International rescue teams joined Iranian crews in probing the wreckage, listening for tapping sounds from anyone trapped below and monitoring reactions of sniffer dogs. Some teams prepared to leave today, but others vowed to stay. "It's never too late. We'll continue," said Terje Engevik, a member of the Norwegian  search crew. "There have been miracles in earthquakes before, in other cities, in other countries, and so we must continue searching," said Eric Soupra, a spokesman for French rescuers. In a reward for such perseverance, Iranian relief worker Shokrollah Abbasi described how people approached him about a house that had not been searched. Using an electronic device, Abbasi and three colleagues found a girl of about 12 years old — unconscious and with a broken leg. "The only reason she remained alive was because the roof had not totally collapsed," Abbasi said. "There was air for her to breathe. We found her in the kitchen. There was a plate of rice near her, and it appeared to me that the food had helped her remain alive." "When we brought out the girl, everybody cried: `O God, this is magic!' " he said. State television reported that a baby girl, cradled in her dead mother's arms, had been rescued Saturday from the rubble of a collapsed home. The rest of her family, including brothers and sisters, were found dead. "She is alive because of her mother's embrace," said Hessamoddin Farrokhyar, a Red Crescent Society official. "The baby girl is in good condition considering the circumstances." At the Bam cemetery, volunteers dug individual graves, but the overwhelming number of bodies made it necessary to bury thousands of victims in mass trenchlike graves hollowed out by bulldozers. In the haste and confusion, mistakes were made. A clergyman from the seminary town of Qom described how three times in the space of five hours yesterday, he was reciting the final prayers for unidentified men wrapped in shrouds when their bodies moved. The first time it happened, "My friends were taking the body to place it in the grave," said Hojatoleslam Mojtaba Zonnor. "Then they thought there was a movement. They called a doctor. After a brief examination, the doctor said, `He's not dead, he's alive.' And they took him out of the shroud and put him in an ambulance and took him away." Zonnor, one of about 500 clergymen from across Iran who came to help bury the dead, said the exact situation happened twice more. Mohammad Safarzadeh, the Revolutionary Guard officer in charge of the graveyard's largest section, said two others, boys, were nearly buried alive. "I saw this with my own eyes," he said. The teenagers arrived swaddled in shrouds in the back of a pickup, like thousands of others buried here. But when workers opened the shrouds to photograph their faces before laying them in the trench, someone noticed that one was still breathing. The second was checked closely and found to be alive as well. "Whenever they find a body, they bring it straight here," Safarzadeh explained. "They are not examined by doctors before they are brought here. "If they look dead, they're believed to be dead." Iran's supreme leader, Ayatollah Ali Khamenei, and President Mohammad Khatami paid separate visits to Bam yesterday. "All of us are responsible to meet the demands of the survivors," Khamenei told people in the streets. "Aid should continue to come so that, God willing, the city of Bam is rebuilt better and this time stronger than before. We can build a strong and developed city out of this devastation." Khatami appealed for international help, saying relief provided by Iran's government and its people was not enough. About 1,400 international relief workers from 26 countries had converged in Bam by yesterday, said Ted Pearn, coordinator of U.N. relief operations. The United States sent eight Air Force C-130 cargo planes full of supplies. Material from Reuters and The Washington Post is included in this report.Caption:  photoMajid / Getty Images : An Iranian boy with his head bandaged sits on a board yesterday in the rubble left by last week's earthquake in Bam, Iran. (0393762341)Majid / Getty Images : Iranians watch as search crews labor in the quake rubble yesterday in Bam, Iran. A powerful temblor hit the region Friday, killing 25,000 people. (0393762446)
