Some investments pay off in crucial moments. When the Nisqually earthquake rattled the walls of the Four Seasons Olympic Hotel in downtown Seattle two years ago, workers held their breath as the rumble caused a 3-foot-high wave in the swimming pool and knocked loose much of the plaster on the building's ornate ceilings, walls and exterior. But when the quake subsided, no structural damage had been done to the then-76-year-old building, thanks to $62.5 million the hotel invested about 20 years ago to bolster the structure and make seismic upgrades. "That was the smartest investment we could have made," said General Manager Brian Flaherty. "It was just heartbreaking what happened to the building (aesthetically)." Cracks in the paint, fissures in the ceilings, noseless decorative cherubs — it was clear that some restoration was necessary. And because hotel management doesn't erect floor-to-ceiling scaffolding in the middle of the lobby every day, it decided to use the opportunity to do a total remodel. It's expected to be complete in September. Gone are the taupes and the cocoas on the walls of The Georgian, the hotel's signature dining room. Now, 11 shades of yellow modernize the room, which had to close for a month to get its new look. The Spanish Ballroom, the mezzanine that rings the front lobby, and each of the 450 guest rooms also have been renovated. Internet and telecommunications amenities were upgraded, as was the hotel's fitness room.  But Flaherty and his team had to get a bit creative while working on the lobby, a space that can't simply close during construction. Scaffolding was covered in thick cream and ebony drapes reminiscent of a theatrical production to hide the unsightly bars of crisscrossed metal. Work was limited to the wee hours to avoid disturbing guests, a consideration not without considerable expense to the hotel. "We took great pains to ensure that the guest experience was not interrupted," Flaherty said. "But that's sometimes easier said than done." With the interior change completed, the building's exterior is up next. It is being pressure-washed to blast off years of grime. The gargoyles that stand sentinel on stone perches and the elaborate masonry will be repaired and repainted. Scaffolding has been erected around the building to protect pedestrians from water and other debris. Insurance from the earthquake covered much of the restoration work, and a capital-investment fund separate from daily operations paid for the extra touches. The total price tag is around $18 million. Although that pales compared with the money spent for the upgrades in the '80s, it's no small sum in this recession. Luxury hotels have been hit especially hard, but Flaherty says the hotel's philosophy doesn't match the gut reaction to hunker down when money's tight. "Most organizations, when times get tough, revisit those amenities that are most expensive and eliminate them," he said. "We have never done that, and that strategy has really paid off for us." That the hotel is taking the economic high road is no surprise to Leonard Garfield, executive director of the Museum of History & Industry. "That's the way the Olympic would do it," he said, calling the hoteliers model stewards of the property. "That's the way they've been doing things throughout their entire history." For Flaherty, one of the most exciting things has been spending the money on something a little more romantic than a seismic upgrade. "It's always appropriate for us as hoteliers to spend money on infrastructure, but that's something that guests never see," he said. "We like to spend money on the things you can touch, see and experience." Lisa Heyamoto: 206-464-2149 or lheyamoto@seattletimes.comCaption:  photoTom Reese / The Seattle Times : Mark Soles restores masonry at the Four Seasons Olympic Hotel, which withstood the 2001 Nisqually earthquake with no structural damage. Cosmetic repairs, however, led to redecorating. (0392980338)
