QONGKURQAK, China -- Wu Xiaoning was jolted awake to find her house collapsing. Wang Xiaomi dashed outdoors and saw schoolchildren throwing themselves to the rumbling ground in terror. The violent quake that struck this remote part of China lasted only seconds. But when it was finished, this farming town lay in ruins. At least 266 people were dead, according to an official count, and the lives of thousands of others were devastated. The quake rumbled through the western Xinjiang region Monday, leaving 90 percent of the town's 30,000 residents homeless as row upon row of mud-brick houses collapsed into dust. The area, 1,750 miles west of Beijing, is so isolated that rescuers were still arriving yesterday. Yesterday, Wu and her husband were lying outdoors on a makeshift bed, sharing a thin mattress on a wide wooden bench. She was bleary-eyed and had straw in her hair. "If the earthquake had lasted any longer, our bedroom would've collapsed and I wouldn't be here today," she said, smiling. "I really thank my god." The quake struck at 10:03 a.m., but it caught many people asleep or eating breakfast -- a quirk of government policy that enforces the same time zone across China. This far west, where in winter the sun doesn't rise until after 9 a.m., people begin their day two hours behind the official clock. For Wang Xiaomi, a doctor at a local clinic, the quake began with a noise he couldn't identify. It turned out to be the sound of his neighbors'  homes falling apart. "I was on my knees cooking breakfast and when I stood up wondering what it was and I nearly fell over," Wang said. "Everything was shaking. The streets were filled with people, screaming, crying. "There were a lot of children on their way to school and they threw themselves onto the ground and couldn't move because they were so scared. The air was filled with dust." Wang spent Monday and Tuesday helping rescuers dig through piles of bricks looking for survivors. "People were crying in the rubble. Some had broken arms and legs, some had heads that were bashed in. They were all bleeding all over," Wang said. "Some were already dead when they were pulled out. They were mostly young children and old people." In all, officials say, 266 people died, 2,055 were injured and more than 3,000 buildings were razed. Surrounded by a vast expanse of ocher-colored dust, Qongkurqak (pronounced Chong kur chak) is in one of China's most remote areas, lying at the western edge of the vast Taklamakan Desert. At dawn yesterday, clusters of families were camped out in makeshift beds in front of their gutted homes, huddled under thin quilts as they tried to keep warm in freezing temperatures. The Chinese Red Cross said it worried about disease among people who lacked adequate tents and blankets, while the government said it was rushing thousands of both to the region by truck and train. The air was filled with the smoke of hundreds of cooking fires. Families sat beside a jumble of possessions pulled from the wreckage -- a chair, a wooden table, a guitar. Around them was a litter of broken tiles, bricks, wood and shards of glass. By noon, the town's grid of streets was bustling with cars, motorcycles and wooden mule-drawn carts. Children wandered about, holding hands. Men smoked and chatted. For the first time since the quake, vendors at a market set up stalls selling fruit, clothes and huge pink cuts of goat meat. Yusan Aisan, a Muslim who sells traditional rice and roasted mutton, stood beside a freshly skinned goat. "Today, I opened because we all have nothing to eat. Everyone has to eat," he said. "My house is gone. Three relatives are gone. But life goes on."Caption:  photoThe Associated Press : Survivors of Monday's earthquake cry outside their destroyed houses in Jiashi County, in northwestern China's Xinjiang region. Thousands have been forced to live in tents in the remote area. (0392867641)
