TECOMAN, Mexico -- His fractured arm bandaged and held tight to his side, Alberto Urena steps cautiously across the dirt floor of his tiny brick-and-wood bedroom and stares up at the sky where his tin roof used to be. His eyes are red with lack of sleep and he winces from the blows he received to the ribs from falling bricks and chunks of cement dislodged by Tuesday's 7.8-magnitude earthquake. The quake killed 28 people, injured 300 and left 10,000 homeless. Urena's wife, Isabel Ochoa, 39 and two months pregnant with their first child, is hospitalized, recovering from a head injury. "When the quake struck, the house started shaking from side to side, then up and down, and everything from above began to fall on top of me," said Urena, 33, pointing to a pile of rubble covering a bare mattress. The flying debris smashed the television set, stereo and a small stove -- Urena's only real possessions. "It makes me so sad to see everything lost," he said. Tuesday's quake hurt most those who have the least: It unleashed its worst devastation on fragile houses of mud, brick and tile inhabited by the state's poorest residents. "These are people who don't have much money ... and they will have the hardest time recovering," said Hector Perestrejo, a spokesman for a gymnasium-turned-shelter in Tecoman that is housing some of the state's new homeless. At least a third of Tecoman's 400 homes were damaged or destroyed. The city's casualties -- two adults and two  children from four families -- all died when the walls of weakened structures fell on them, said Jorge Luis Espinosa, Tecoman civil-protection director. In the historic center of the nearby city of Colima, houses made of adobe -- mud baked with straw -- fell in heaps to the ground. At least one woman was killed when her house fell on top of her. In Manzanillo, the tourist hotels swayed but were largely undamaged. The only injury reported in the hotel zone occurred at Karmina Palace, where a bamboo pole fell onto one of the resort's managers, hurting his arm. President Vicente Fox said Wednesday that the damage should not deter visitors from traveling to the coastal resorts, and city leaders echoed his statement Thursday, but hotel employees and tour owners said many tourists left as quickly as they could and others canceled vacations. "The beaches are empty," said Hector Jimenez, who leads sport-fishing and snorkeling tours from three local hotels. "Nobody wants to come to an area where there are earthquakes." Juan Carlos Aguayo didn't lose the three-room house he shares in downtown Colima with his mother, three children, four siblings and a niece, but he can no longer live in it -- at least not until someone helps him lift off the metal roof that was dislodged in the quake. The roof is tilted at a dangerous angle, and Aguayo is worried that if he touches it, he might bring down the house's walls, which cracked and buckled from the force of the quake. "We need to build a house that is stronger than this," said Aguayo, 26, as he walked beneath a roof of tiles and sticks tied with electrical cords and rope. That won't be easy: Aguayo makes a living as an assistant at a vegetable stand -- a job that brings in less than $10 a day. Fox and Colima state governor Fernando Moreno have promised assistance for residents to build stronger homes to replace the 800 damaged across the state. But for now, Aguayo and his family are sleeping on the floor of an outside patio and will keep doing so until they are assured that their house is safe. In downtown Tecoman, two dozen residents spend each night in tents they've erected on a small dirt soccer field. Their neighbors set up camp on a nearby basketball court, sleeping on cotton quilts and blankets or on wooden pews borrowed from the local church. In Urena's neighborhood, the scene is one of devastation. Brick and cement walls that once stood as entranceways to the tin-roofed shacks are now large piles of rubble. Corrugated roofs that provided the barest of shelter dangle threateningly half on, half off their wooden supports. Others have fallen off entirely. Urena, cradling his bandaged arm, says he plans to stay put. He doesn't expect the government to replace his modest house, but he does hope some money is forthcoming to help him shore up the walls and replace his roof. "This is the only room I had," he said. "Now I have to sleep out on the street."       Information from the Los Angeles Times is included in this report.Caption:  photo,mapJohn Moore / The Associated Press : Nieves Contreras recounts Tuesday's earthquake as she stands in her damaged home in Tecoman, Mexico. The house's roof fell on top of her and her son, but they were unhurt and managed to salvage most of their belongings. (0392767841)The Associated Press:  7.8 magnitude quake (GKCDN1V0)
