Two years after the Nisqually earthquake hurled chunks of the old Fenix nightclub's building onto the street and rendered the Pioneer Square club uninhabitable, the popular hangout is gearing up for a mid-May reopening. Its rebirth at a new location in the old Buttnick Building at First Avenue South and South Washington Street has taken two years and $4.2 million, much of that spent to seismically retrofit the 1909 building. Coils were drilled 80 feet into the earth, and diagonal braces strap the building to its foundation like a series of seat belts. "This building is probably going to be the safest building that you can find downtown," said Fenix co-owner Mike Lagervall. Sprinklers, extra-wide stairwells and security cameras have been installed, and the number of staffers has been increased. There's also an elevator for wheelchair access. "We'd carry them up and down at the old Fenix," said the club's other co-owner, Rick Wyatt. Once opened, the Fenix will be one of the city's bigger music venues, with 18,500 square feet of space and capacity for up to 1,200 people. In years past, the reopening of such an ambitious club would have ignited the old Pioneer Square feud that pitted club owners against merchants, city officials and residents. But, for the most part, that hasn't happened. People hope the Fenix will bring business to the ailing historical district. Wyatt moved to Seattle in 1985 after a stint in Hawaii. He thought managing a  club would be fun. To survive, say its owners, the Fenix needed a steady base of patrons and as little trouble as possible. Wyatt and Lagervall focused on running a club that cooperated with neighbors. Their formula worked. Wyatt says that if the club ever became a bad neighbor, it wouldn't be long before other Pioneer Square businesses would come a-knocking. "I have confidence that Rick (Wyatt) is a good neighbor and he knows how to run a good club," said Benjamin Nicholls, program manager for Pioneer Square Community Association. "Business sucks; most of us are going broke," said Steve Crosier, manager of Doc Maynard's, another Pioneer Square nightclub and a board member of the association. He said his business is half of what it was 2½ years ago. He blames the slump on the recession, the quake and increased competition from casinos that can afford to pay more for performances. The Fenix, he thinks, will help bring people to Pioneer Square. "It's going to be an incredible shot in the arm," he said. Many daytime merchants also anticipate the Fenix's presence. "I support it wholeheartedly; I'd like to see that corner cleaned up," said Terry Derosier, owner of Agate Designs, across the street from the club. Even the police are onboard: Capt. Mike Sanford, West Precinct police commander, praised the Fenix owners as "salt of the earth" people who have a history of managing trouble-free nightspots. But not everyone is pleased. Michael Lindsey, owner of Laguna, a vintage pottery shop across from the club, is concerned that Fenix and its patrons will be appropriating the city-owned Occidental Park for private use — either by lining up in the park as they wait to get into the club's entrance on an adjacent alley, or by cutting through the park on their way to the club. The park, Lindsey points out, closes at 11:30 p.m. and its hours can be extended only with support from a community group and approval by the city. Wyatt, however, says the city has granted the club a permit for access through the park and that he plans to become the park's unofficial steward. "I have a 25-year lease," Wyatt said. "I'll be here awhile." Sarah Anne Wright: 206-464-2752 or swright@seattletimes.comCaption:  photo,mapThe Seattle Times: Fenix nightclub to get new location (GKAF5O7M)Tom Reese / The Seattle Times : Rick Wyatt, co-owner of the Fenix, envisions a renewal of nightlife in Pioneer Square when the club reopens. He's shown in what will be the live-performance area of the club. (0392985503)
