COLIMA, Mexico -- A day after west-central Mexico was battered by the region's strongest earthquake in eight years, killing at least 25 people, residents rushed to remove personal belongings from their heavily damaged homes. At least 300 people were injured in the 7.8 magnitude quake, civil-defense officials said. Aftershocks left residents anxious all day. Many held vigils for the dead, some in streets that were filled with rubble. In Guadalajara, Mexico's second-largest city, more than 100 miles from the epicenter on the Pacific coast, bells from one of colonial city's dozens of ancient churches fell from the tower, and dozens of houses partly collapsed. The quake also rocked Mexico City, 300 miles east of the epicenter. A 5.8 magnitude aftershock struck at 1:41 p.m. local time yesterday. Two adjacent 20-story buildings in the city's center swayed so much during the first quake that they bumped each other, witnesses said. About 1,000 engineers surveyed the capital yesterday and found little significant structural damage, city officials said. Thousands of residents, who remember a terrifying 1985 earthquake that shattered Mexico City and killed more than 10,000 people, ran into the streets. Many remained outside all night, fearing aftershocks, and dozens of people were treated at local hospitals for shock. By far the most serious damage occurred in the small agricultural and tourist coastal state of Colima, where most of the dead were found under  collapsed ruins of their homes. In the city of Colima, the state capital, known for its whitewashed buildings, tall coconut trees and inviting town square, officials said at least 166 buildings collapsed. Many of them were adobe structures dating back more than a century that crumbled like dry cake. Walls crashed down on parked cars and reduced neighborhoods to piles of rubble. The city's landmark cathedral was closed while officials inspected cracks in its walls. Part of the city jail collapsed and Mexican soldiers called to the disaster area guarded inmates to keep them from fleeing in the chaos. Oscar Mejía Gutiérrez, a Red Cross doctor working in Colima, said that in some neighborhoods as many as 40 percent of homes were seriously damaged. Had the earthquake occurred later, when most people would have been asleep, the death toll would have been higher, he said. Among the dead were an elderly man killed in a fire caused when a bedside candle overturned during the quake. President Vicente Fox, who flew to Colima yesterday, called on the military to send soldiers and marines to Colima and the nearby resort and commercial and fishing port of Manzanillo to assess damage and help the victims. A lighthouse at the port of Manzanillo was toppled by the quake. Officials said there was structural damage to the port near the entrance of the canal that leads to it. Several small seaside towns were evacuated because of fears of possible tsunamis. In Colima, hundreds of families in several neighborhoods that had been displaced by the quake climbed precariously over piles of fallen bricks to grab their kitchen stoves, children's bicycles and red roof tiles, piling them on the edges of rubble-covered streets. A teenage girl wailed, held by an older woman and a younger girl as they stood at a street corner overlooking the remains of a two-story house. The teenager cried out, "I'm going to miss her," and sobbed uncontrollably against the sleeves of her red sweater. She and others in the family had escaped from their house during a strong aftershock. Her mother, the last one to leave, was less than 5 feet from the door but was crushed by rubble. A green house next door attracted much attention from passers-by after its second floor dropped onto the first and forced the structure to kneel into the street at a scary angle. In another Colima neighborhood that was severely damaged, several people gathered to mourn the loss of a 65-year-old mother of seven who was crushed by a wall.       Information from The Washington Post is included in this report. Quake Information       The American Red Cross of King and Kitsap counties suggests contacting the following for information about friends or relatives possibly involved in the Mexico earthquake: •       Inquiries concerning       United States citizens should be directed to the U.S. Department of State, Office of Overseas Citizens Services, at 888-407-4747 or 202-647-5225. •       For inquiries       about relatives living in Mexico who are not U.S. citizens, the Red Cross recommends that people call early in the morning or late at night. For updates:       www.seattleredcross.org.Caption:  photo,mapJOSE LUIS MAGANA / The Associated Press : A rescue team with a sniffer dog walks through the rubble of a destroyed home in Colima, Mexico, yesterday after Tuesday's 7.8-magnitude earthquake. (0392764658)The Associated Press:  Plate collision causes quake (G82DLM3S)
