PASO ROBLES, Calif. — An earthquake rocked California's central coast yesterday and shook the state from Los Angeles to San Francisco, collapsing old downtown buildings and killing at least two people in the rubble. The 11:16 a.m. quake — its magnitude measured at 6.5 — pitched the roof of Paso Robles' 1892 clock-tower building into the street, crushing a row of parked cars in this small San Luis Obispo County town about 20 miles east of the epicenter. More than 40 other buildings were damaged. It was the first deadly earthquake since the 6.7-magnitude temblor that hit Northridge in 1994, and the most powerful in California since a 7.1 quake struck the desert near Joshua Tree in 1999. Forty people, including two from the site of the roof collapse, were treated at hospitals for injuries or chest pains. The main jolt yesterday was centered in a sparsely populated area about 11 miles north of the coastal town of Cambria. It was immediately followed by at least 50 aftershocks larger than 3.0, the biggest of which was estimated at 4.7, according to the U.S. Geological Survey. The quake shook Hearst Castle in San Simeon, the estate of newspaper mogul William Randolph Hearst commissioned in 1919. The castle — a particularly popular tourist attraction this time of year because of its Hearst family Christmas ornaments — was evacuated as a precaution. The quake also shook the federal building in San Francisco, 165 miles northwest of the epicenter, causing  the building's upper floors to sway for about 30 seconds. People in downtown Los Angeles, 185 miles southeast, felt a sustained rolling motion. "It was pretty sharp," said Sharyn Conn, receptionist at the oceanside Cypress Cove Inn in Cambria, population 6,200. "It really went on and on. I just got everyone under the door frames and rode it out." In Paso Robles, a town of 26,000 people in a region dotted with wineries and horse ranches, searchers dug through the debris of the collapsed row of stores in the clock-tower building, pulling apart piles of bricks and mangled wood with their hands, shovels and heavy equipment. The bodies of Jennifer Myrick, 19, of Atascadero, and Marilyn Zafuto, 55, of Paso Robles, were found on the street outside a dress shop, police Sgt. Bob Adams said. The owner of a car damaged in the rubble was unaccounted for last night. "My roof basically jumped onto the street and landed on cars with people in them," said Nick Sherwin, 61, who operated Pan Jewelers in the building. Marilyn Curry watched the buildings collapse from her law firm across the street, then ran to a city park where people were frantically searching for others they knew. "There were people shouting outside, `Oh my God, oh my God,' " she said. "Everybody was just shaking, then we were all just grabbing onto each other. "There was a lot of hugging going on. We were all just accounting for each other: `Have you seen so and so? Have you seen so and so?' " Adams said the historic building was made of wood and unreinforced masonry, a type of construction no longer allowed under modern building codes. At dusk, the smell of sulfur filled the air: The quake had ruptured a capped pipe that used to deliver artesian well water to mud baths for which Paso Robles was once famous. Damage appeared minor elsewhere in the region. Several people were reported hurt by falling barrels at a winery, San Luis Obispo County authorities said. "We lost our chimney, and a bunch of barrels of wine fell down," said Dan Panico of Dover Canyon Winery, a 2,000-case-a-year producer near Paso Robles. "They were stacked in pyramids and fell to the floor. I'd say there's a couple hundred gallons of wine on the floor from the barrels. In some areas, it ran out the front of the winery, two to three inches deep." Gary Conway, proprietor of Carmody McKnight Winery, said the earthquake coincided with military exercises at nearby Fort Roberts, and he initially thought the two were related. "We heard the distant rumbling of cannon fire, and as I came outside I heard that in coordination with the earthquake. That unnerved us," said Conway, a former actor who appeared in the television series "Lost in Space." About 10,000 homes and businesses were without power in the San Luis Obispo area, said John Nelson, spokesman for Pacific Gas and Electric (PG&E). Phone service became spotty as the system quickly became overloaded. The quake opened cracks on Highway 1, and state crews were checking cracking and buckling on Highway 46, but both routes remained open, according to the Highway Patrol. At Hearst Castle, only a handful of the estate's 22,500 antiques and art pieces were damaged, and the buildings showed no initial signs of cracks. Experts were examining each of the 150 rooms. "I'm amazed and in awe walking through and seeing it's intact," said Hearst Castle museum director Hoyt Fields, who has worked there for 34 years. In the town of San Simeon, high drama shook the Wampum Trading Post. When the earthquake hit, it freed an arrow from its bow and sent it sailing across the small shop, said Susan Owen, 59, a store employee. "When the earthquake ... hit, the building almost twisted, and then it went side to side and a little bit up and down and back and forth all at the same time — it was really amazing," Owen said. The quake was felt in the control room of the Diablo Canyon nuclear-power plant operated by PG&E. Nelson said that there appeared to be no damage to the plant and that it was functioning normally. The quake struck in a known fault zone on a series of faults that run parallel to the San Andreas Fault, said Lucy Jones, scientist in charge of the U.S. Geological Survey office in Pasadena. "It's luckily on the coast — there is not very much nearby. That's a good thing," she said. The last one of a similar size in the area was in 1952, said Ross Stein of the USGS in Menlo Park. Compiled from The Associated Press, Los Angeles Times and Knight Ridder Newspapers. California quakes The largest earthquakes in California during the past half-century: • Magnitude 7.5, Kern County, near Bakersfield, July 21, 1952 • Magnitude 7.3, Landers, Southern California desert, June 28, 1992 • Magnitude 7.1, Hector Mine, near Joshua Tree, Oct. 16, 1999 • Magnitude 7.0, Loma Prieta, San Francisco Bay area, Oct. 17, 1989 • Magnitude 6.7, Northridge, Jan. 17, 1994 • Magnitude 6.6, Sylmar, Feb. 9, 1971 • Magnitude 6.5, preliminary reading, Cambria, Dec. 22, 2003 • Magnitude 6.5, Borrego Mountain, April 9, 1968 • Magnitude 6.4, Imperial Valley, Oct. 5, 1979 • Magnitude 6.2, Superstition Hills, near Salton Sea, Nov. 24, 1987 Source: U.S. Geological SurveyCaption:  photoAna Elisa Fuentes / Getty Images : Part of the roof of a collapsed two-story building hangs over the first story yesterday in Paso Robles. ``My roof basically jumped onto the street and landed on cars with people in them,'' said Nick Sherwin, who operated a jewelry store in the building. (0393749575)Michael A. Mariant / The Associated Press : Rescue workers rush to remove bricks from cars crushed by a collapsed building yesterday in Paso Robles, Calif., 20 miles east of the earthquake's epicenter. (0393748863)Joe Johnston / The Associated Press : Friends and relatives of an earthquake victim comfort each other yesterday in Paso Robles. Yesterday's quake, which killed at least two people, was the first deadly one in California since the 6.7-magnitude Northridge quake in 1994. (0393749060)The Associated Press: Magnitude 6.5 earthquake struck yesterday at 11:16 a.m. local time; At least two dead in block of collapsed building (GNQJBGLD)
