TIDJELABINE, Algeria — An Islamic party set up a camp yesterday for people left homeless by Algeria's devastating earthquake and handed out food and water, showing itself ready to fill the vacuum of aid distribution left by the government. Since last week's deadly quake, anger has mounted at what survivors say is the slow government response — with townspeople at times pelting visiting senior officials, even the president, with stones or debris. The interior minister was so angered by jeers from survivors in one town that he threatened to withhold tents and other aid if protests continued, witnesses said. The government later apologized. But the criticism has provided an opening for Muslim fundamentalists, despite efforts to squeeze them out by the military-backed government, which has battled armed Islamic radicals in a civil war since 1992. "We want to take charge of families in this village for one or two years until they can be housed again," said Ahmed Houlim, a member of El-Islah oua El-Irched, an aid group run by a moderate Islamic party. The May 21 quake killed at least 2,218 people, injured more than 9,000, and left an unknown number missing. Panic spread again in the quake zone east of the capital, Algiers, when the strongest aftershock yet rocked the region yesterday, killing at least three people and injuring 187, state radio said. Since last week, many residents have been living in the streets or in tents set up in parks, fearing  aftershocks could topple unstable buildings. El-Islah did not hide the fact that it was looking to attract supporters as it set up tents for 13 families whose homes were left in ruins in Tidjelabine, a town of 10,000 near the quake's epicenter. Some Islah workers wore aprons with their party name and logo displayed on the back. The government has grown jittery over Muslim groups that excelled in providing aid — and winning gratitude — during the November 2001 flooding in Algiers that killed more than 700 people. Fearful that fundamentalists could turn that gratitude into political power, the government issued a warning Monday against "irregular" collection and distribution of donations for quake victims. The government lumps such groups with Islamic insurgents it has been fighting since 1992. Between 100,000 and 150,000 Algerians have been killed in the brutal violence that erupted in 1992 after the government canceled elections that fundamentalist Islamists were poised to win. The Armed Islamic Group and the Salafist Group for Preaching and Combat are fighting to create a purist Islamic state. Algeria's armed forces stormed a Salafist desert hideout earlier this month, freeing 17 European tourists held hostage for more than two months. A second group of 15 tourists remain captive in the Sahara desert, their fate unknown. The government offered the rebels an amnesty in 1999, and guerrilla-linked violence has fallen sharply in recent years, bringing back foreign investment and some tourism. Information from Reuters is included in this report.Caption:  photoNabil / The Associated Press : An Algerian soldier guards food donated for earthquake victims in Sidi-Daoued. (0393155324)
