CORSO, Algeria — Grief turned to anger yesterday as survivors of a devastating earthquake in Algeria blamed inadequate rescue efforts and shoddy construction for a death toll that surpassed 2,000. Facing shortages of food, medicine and blankets and often forced to dig by hand in search of survivors, some complained about a lack of excavation equipment and outside help. Others accused the government of having allowed substandard construction. When President Abdelaziz Bouteflika visited hard-hit Boumerdes yesterday, an angry crowd chanted "pouvoir assassin!" — a common slogan roughly translated as "the authorities — killers." Police fought to hold back the crowd as Bouteflika drove away. Many in the crowd threw objects at his car and some kicked its sides. In Boumerdes, poultry vendor Lies Boumeridja pointed to two neighboring buildings, one destroyed and the other still intact. "Our building is still standing because it was built by an honest man," he said. "That house over there used to be filled with lovely people, but it was built by villains." The death toll from Wednesday's 6.8-magnitude quake reached 2,047 yesterday, the North African country's interior ministry said. Another 8,626 were injured. The number was expected to rise as bodies are pulled from the rubble, and Hakim Mohand, of the Algerian civil protection unit, said the death toll could hit 3,000. The government struggled to deal with the quake aftermath. A dozen bulldozers  and earth removers, as well as five cranes and dozens of buses carrying volunteers, blankets, tents and gas stoves, snarled a main highway leading toward the epicenter yesterday. Police tried to free the jam. There was widespread discontent about the aid efforts. "The state failed," Le Matin newspaper said, claiming hundreds of buried survivors could not be saved because rescue efforts were inadequate. "Local authorities were conspicuous in their absence." Mohamed Laichaoui, an architect in Algiers, blamed contractors who cut corners and officials who he said often wrote up bogus approvals for housing projects. "Developers don't respect the technical norms. They cheat on the amounts of concrete and iron that they use on the construction sites," he said. "Many people are dead because of them." Prime Minister Ahmed Ouyahia vowed to prosecute contractors "if malpractice in construction is proven," the official news agency, APS, reported. Ouyahia promised $7,000 in aid for each victim and housing for the homelessCaption:  photoClaude Paris / The Associated Press : An Algerian couple inspect their damaged home in Boumerdes, east of Algiers, yesterday, three days after a major earthquake struck the region. Survivors are facing a shortage of food and medicine. (0393150864)
