BAM, Iran — Hopes of finding more earthquake survivors in Iran's ancient city of Bam faded yesterday as the sharp, foul smell of death permeated the pulverized rubble where mud-brick houses became instant tombs for thousands of people. Rescue workers from around the world joined Iranians in searching through powdery debris that left little room for air pockets that could allow people to survive while awaiting help. Only one person was pulled alive from the rubble yesterday. A day earlier, officials reported freeing 150 survivors. "We have not lost hope for survivors, and our priority remains to find them," Interior Minister Abdolvahed Mousavi Lari said. Later, he told reporters that the search for survivors would probably end tonight, adding, "Tomorrow is the last hope." More than 20,000 bodies, including that of one American killed while visiting the city's 2,000-year-old citadel, have been retrieved since Friday's magnitude-6.6 earthquake shook the city and surrounding region in southeastern Iran, a local government spokesman said. An additional 10,000 people were hospitalized, he said. Some officials said they expected the death toll to reach 30,000 and possibly 40,000. The traditional sun-dried, mud-brick construction of the houses doomed many occupants, as it has for centuries in quake-prone Iran. Heavy roofs, often sealed with cement or plaster to keep out rain, sit atop mud-brick walls that have no support beams. When walls crumble, roofs  smash down, leaving few air pockets and crushing or suffocating anyone inside. The quake struck about 5:30 a.m. when most people were sleeping. Luca Spoletini, spokesman for the Italian Civil Protection, said its teams found only corpses after a day spent probing the rubble. Describing a visit to Barazat, a town with a population of 20,000 a few miles outside Bam, Spoletini said, "There is nothing anymore. Not one single house, not one single building stands upright. It is like the Apocalypse. I have never seen anything like that." Cemeteries overflowed with bodies. Mullahs in shirt-sleeves rather than their usual robes and wearing face masks against the dust and smell tore sheeting to shroud corpses. There was no time to wash the bodies according to Islamic rituals. They were brought in blankets, sprayed with disinfectant to guard against disease and tipped into trenches hollowed out by mechanical diggers. By Saturday night, enough tents had arrived to accommodate the thousands of homeless. There was even a bit of normalcy, with people complaining they had to share a tent with another family. By last night, some of the city's water, telephone and gas stations had become operational, but service remained spotty. Planes from dozens of countries landed in the provincial capital of Kerman with relief supplies, volunteers and dogs trained to find bodies and survivors. U.S. military C-130 cargo planes were among them, despite long-severed diplomatic relations and President Bush's characterization of Iran as part of an "axis of evil" with Iraq and North Korea. Up to 600 foreign aid workers are reported to be on the scene to help. But round-the-clock searches were complicated by cold, rain, repeated aftershocks, confusion and looting. Vans of young men armed with pistols and Kalashnikov assault rifles drove into Bam and stole Red Crescent tents, while others on motorbikes chased aid trucks, picking up blankets thrown out by soldiers. Local people and some aid workers said relief efforts were chaotic. "There is no organization. Whoever is stronger takes the aid," said resident Mehdi Dehghani. Roland Schlachter, leading a team from the Swiss Corps for Humanitarian Aid, said tents, heating stoves and blankets were urgently needed, as was coordination of the relief effort. "There is actually no coordination," he said in Bam. Rescuers, supplies or pledges of aid also arrived from Italy, Britain, Austria, Azerbaijan, Finland, Germany, Russia, Turkey and dozens of other nations. An Iranian navy helicopter crashed 30 miles southwest of Bam yesterday after delivering tents and blankets, regional officials said. All three crewmen were reported killed. Bam was best known for its medieval citadel, considered the world's largest surviving mud fortress. Most of it, including a massive square tower, crumbled like a sand castle when the quake hit. Material from Reuters was included in this report.Caption:  photoMajid / Getty Images : An Austrian rescue worker and his dog search for victims yesterday in Bam, Iran. A powerful earthquake hit the region early Friday, leveling mud-brick homes as residents slept. (0393759289)
