TOKYO — A 3-year-old girl buried in the rubble of an earthquake-triggered landslide in northern Japan was found dead today, a day after rescuers pulled her younger brother alive from the wreckage. Workers were still struggling to free Mayu Minagawa's body from the car where she, her mother and her brother were buried in Saturday's 6.8-magnitude earthquake, said Tetsuya Hasebe of the Niigata Prefectural government. The death brought the toll in Saturday's quake to 33. Workers freed Yuta Minagawa, 2, yesterday in a dramatic rescue broadcast live on national television. Shortly afterward, they retrieved Takako Minagawa, 39, from the driver's seat, but she was declared dead at a hospital. Officials said the impact of the landslide killed her almost immediately. The team worked through the night to reach Mayu in hope of finding her alive, but had trouble because she was deeply lodged inside the van, which lay at a steep incline, officials said. An unidentified rescue worker told public broadcaster NHK that the boulders virtually demolished the van, adding that workers had to move slowly because there was a risk that removing rocks might set off a mini-landslide. On Tuesday, Japanese media cited disaster officials as saying heat sensors were unable to detect the girl's body and she hadn't responded to their calls. Kyodo News reported that rescuers had spotted her body in the car but that it showed no vital signs, such as a pulse. The van was found Tuesday under hillside rubble, and television cameras tracked rescuers painstakingly digging through to a voice they heard inside. Eventually, the young boy was shown being lifted out in the arms of a rescue worker — covered in mud and looking weak, but conscious. He was taken by helicopter to a hospital. Yuta happened to find an opening under the boulders where he kept relatively warm for four days, even in the late October chill. "The area was crushed by a large rock, and Yuta just happened to find a 1-meter [3-foot] opening and was standing up by himself," said Mitsuo Kiyotsuka, one of the rescuers, smiling in wonder. "We'd been telling ourselves we'd get them out. But then he appeared and it was like, `Can this be true?' " Officials at Nagaoka Red Cross Hospital later said the boy was dehydrated and had hypothermia and a large gash on his head, but was in stable condition. NHK public broadcaster quoted the toddler telling his father that he drank milk in the car, and he asked for melons and water at the hospital. The plight of Yuta and his family drew intense interest in Japan as TV stations showed the desperate attempts by his father, who had been working in Tokyo at the time of the quake, to track down his wife and children. The rescue effort fed the country with hopeful news after Saturday's quake, which injured more than 2,000. Earthquake survivors in temporary shelters gathered around television sets, watching crew members pull Yuta and his mother out from under the boulders. The rescue effort was hobbled by continuing aftershocks, including a magnitude 6.1 jolt yesterday morning that triggered landslides across Niigata, a largely rural area about 160 miles north of Tokyo. In the four days since Saturday's quake, the Meteorological Agency recorded 526 aftershocks strong enough for people to feel. Agency official Masahiro Yamamoto warned that a magnitude-6 aftershock could hit the area within three days, urging residents to take caution and stay away from damaged buildings. About 100,000 residents remain in public shelters amid fears the aftershocks could trigger more landslides. Thousands camped out in tents and cars, too afraid to return home. With many roads still blocked by landslides and damaged by cracks, relief workers in helicopters and cars struggled to get emergency goods to isolated hamlets and crowded evacuation centers.Caption:  photoAtsushi Taketazu / The Associated Press : A rescue worker carries Yuta Minagawa, 2, after the boy survived four days under a landslide caused by an earthquake in Nagaoka, Japan. (0394969396)
