BAM, Iran — Power supplies are erratic, telephones unreliable and most services disrupted, but the flow of opium into the earthquake-hit city of Bam has carried on unabated. A city in the corridor of illegal drug trafficking between Afghanistan and Europe, Bam is home for many of the estimated 2 million drug addicts in Iran. Officials said about 20 percent of those over the age of 15 in a pre-quake population of 80,000 were believed to be addicted. Despite the quake devastation, several people said there was no trouble finding cheap supplies. "People ask us whether we would like to be sent to another city, but I tell them, `I would rather stay here and smoke,' " said a man who identified himself only as Hossein, deeply inhaling from a cigarette inside a makeshift relief tent. Hossein said the ancient Silk Road city was awash with opium even though almost every other service was severed by the Dec. 26 quake that killed about 35,000, according to the most recent estimates. He said police guarding Iran's frontiers to Afghanistan and Pakistan had been redeployed to Bam to prevent looting, meaning drug-supply routes from the southeastern province of Sistan-Baluchistan were no longer so closely patrolled. "Supply is very easy," Hossein said. "I would say someone in every third tent here is an opium smoker." Opium and heroin from Afghanistan, the world's biggest producer, and Pakistan flood across Iran's porous eastern borders. Much of the world's  opium seizures are made in Iran, where drugs cost a fraction of their price in the West. Hossein's wife said the poppy seed was a key element in the local culture. "If someone comes to your home and you do not offer them a dish of opium on charcoal, then they assume you are uncivilized," she said, prompting Hossein to quickly offer to fire up a fresh batch. Several others confirmed Hossein's views, even though addicts are generally reluctant to admit their habit. White-bearded Mohammad Emamifar, in a tent in another part of Bam, said he did not use opium but said the problem was widespread and the earthquake had not changed that at all. "The drug culture is very bad," he said. Material from The Associated Press is included in this report.
