CHALOUS, Iran — A helicopter taking a governor and his entourage from the site of a deadly earthquake crashed in the mountains of northern Iran yesterday, killing everyone on board, official Tehran television reported. The crash came as army helicopters ferried rescue teams to mountain villages in northern and central Iran cut off by landslides caused by Friday's quake, in which at least 35 people were killed and 250 were injured. Those killed in the helicopter crash included Masoud Emami, the governor of Qazvin province, three of his aides and a journalist working for Iran's state-run television, the report said. It did not say how many others were aboard. State-run TV reported there were 20 aftershocks following Friday's quake, including a 4.6-magnitude temblor yesterday morning in the southeastern city of Bam, where a 6.6-magnitude quake in December killed 26,000 people. Friday's quake was so powerful it cracked and shattered windows in Tehran, more than 60 miles from the hardest-hit villages. Out of fear of a greater quake, many people in Tehran slept outdoors in yards, parks or in the streets. The government denied widespread speculation about an impending quake. Bijan Dastari, a senior Red Crescent Society official, said 35 people died and 250 were injured in the Friday afternoon earthquake, measured at magnitude 6.2 by the U.S. Geological Survey, that struck northern and central Iran. The road from Tehran to Chalous was riddled with large cracks, rocks and giant boulders, as well as cars that either were smashed or badly damaged by boulders. Crushed cars were being cleared by trailer trucks. Fattollah Najafi, the 60-year-old owner of a roadside restaurant, said he felt the tremor, then saw boulders rolling down the mountain. "One car that was hit by a boulder exploded into flames, and as far as I know everyone in it was killed," he said. Sixteen people were buried in their cars and more than 70 others were injured by landslides and falling boulders on the mountainous Chalous road, state-run television reported. Chalous is 55 miles north of Tehran. Alamout, the area hardest hit by the quake, is a remote region with a sinister history. It was home to an 11th-century order founded by Hassan Sabbah, who was known in Europe as the old Man of the Mountain. His followers, known for their blind obedience and successful assassinations of many notables of the period, spread terror throughout Persia and Syria and were known to target Christian crusaders.Caption:  photoHasan Sarbakhshian / The Associated Press : Workers try to remove rocks yesterday that fell during Friday's 6.2-magnitude earthquake onto the Chalous road in northern Iran. (0394236348)
