A former geology professor and earthquake expert says King County failed to determine the danger of a potential fault before choosing a Snohomish County site for a planned sewage-treatment plant. Instead, King County is relying on building codes that don't consider the South Whidbey Island fault, believed capable of a 7-magnitude earthquake and that might be running through property chosen for its $1.3 billion Brightwater sewage-treatment plant, Robert Yeats testified before the King County hearing examiner yesterday. Yeats, a retired Oregon State University professor and author of "Living with Earthquakes in the Pacific Northwest," is the main witness for the Sno-King Environmental Alliance (SKEA), which appealed the county's documentation of Brightwater's potential effects if the plant is built near the intersection of Highways 9 and 522. Residents fear an earthquake could damage plant equipment and conveyance lines, sending raw sewage into an underground aquifer used for drinking water. The alliance says King County knew enough about the potential fault but ignored evidence of its existence. The county released its final environmental-impact statement in November with little data on seismic problems. Weeks later, it announced it would build at Highway 9 rather than a smaller site in Edmonds. "The county states it's done what it should do to study seismic activity, but they left out the most important step," Yeats testified. "We can determine once and for all whether the fault is active or not, and this is now standard practice." The alliance is the only remaining appellant fighting the county's scientific studies used to site the Brightwater plant. Eight groups, mostly governments, initially filed notices of appeal, but King County settled with some while others dropped their challenges — a point made by county officials yesterday. But they say state laws require that only the best available science be used at the time of publication and that any new data on seismic activity still will be used in design and engineering of the new plant. Brightwater project manager Christie True, who also testified yesterday, says county officials already are considering the fault's potential and how expensive it would be to build to stricter earthquake codes. If the fault is near the plant, it's plausible that stricter building codes might be needed for a sewage plant there, Yeats testified. True said yesterday she estimates that only a few buildings on the northern part of the property would need seismic upgrades — including the existing StockPot soup factory. The U.S. Geological Survey, which is studying the fault, wants to dig a trench along the fault's perceived route. Core soil samples should prove whether seismic activity is responsible for land movement there and thus prove the fault's existence. USGS officials have tried for months to set up the study but are still working to gain permission from various landowners. "We'd even be willing to pay for the trenching if that will help," she said. Costs have yet to be determined. In the Northwest, it's nearly impossible to stay away from fault lines, both sides testified. Safeco Field and Qwest Field (the former Seahawks Stadium), for instance, are exceptionally close to the Seattle fault. Brightwater designers, housed near King Street Station, also straddle a fault line, officials said yesterday. "So it's not a problem for us to design to higher standards," True said. The hearing is expected to wrap up today or Friday, and the hearing examiner has 15 days to issue a ruling. Christopher Schwarzen: 425-783-0577 or cschwarzen@seattletimes.com
