Woodinville | A trench dug at the proposed site of the Brightwater sewage-treatment plant shows signs of faultlike activity in the area, raising questions of how active the fault might be. King County's trenching at the proposed Brightwater sewage-treatment plant's site north of Woodinville shows early indications of faultlike activity, U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) officials say. Ordered to conduct seismic-activity tests by a King County hearing examiner, Brightwater officials began digging a trench last week at property off Highway 9 and north of Highway 522 to look for evidence of possible fault lines in the region. USGS officials suspect strands of the Southern Whidbey Island fault extend through the northern tip of property King County plans to use for its Brightwater plant. Within the 8-foot-deep, 150-foot-long trench, a slight deformation of land signaled to USGS officials the probable sign of an earthquake in the area within the past 15,000 years. To seismologists, 15,000 years is considered very recent. King County officials have said it won't make any difference to their plant construction. They're already designing the plant to higher earthquake standards for a few buildings that will be located that far north, said Christie True, Brightwater's project manager. "Even prior to the decision to trench, we decided to design the plant as if there was a fault here," True said. Scientists know that about 3,000 years ago a magnitude 7 earthquake erupted along the Southern Whidbey Island fault, which runs off the island and into Snohomish County. But where it extends has been in question. Recent trenching earlier this summer near the Cottage Lake area, a few miles northeast of the Brightwater site, shows proof of earthquake activity that appears comparable to what has been found so far at the Brightwater site, said Craig Weaver, a coordinator for the USGS National Earthquake Program. "This is a pretty clear example of one major feature and a few smaller features [related to earthquake activity]," Weaver said, referring to the deformation. "There is evidence here of a fold." Inside the trench, soil layers of different colors run in horizontal lines along the trench except where a minor fold of one soil layer atop another is evident — an obvious deformation, Weaver said. The upheaval is consistent with satellite imagery and laser mapping that show scarps — scarred earth underneath plant life — in the area. The USGS followed one scarp and dug the trench at the end of it. Weaver acknowledged that the tectonic activity shown in the trench was likely a one-time event. But part of what USGS officials are trying to deduce is how active the fault might be. None of the operational parts of the treatment plant will be within 100 feet of the area. But opponents who raised the issue before a King County hearing examiner last summer say they don't feel safe about having a sewage plant that close to a fault line. They're worried an earthquake could send raw sewage into a drinking-water aquifer. "Early on, King County eliminated other sites because they were too close to fault lines," said Corinne Hensley of the Sno-King Environmental Alliance, a grass-roots organization challenging the project's Highway 9 site. "If they were worried about those, then they should be just as worried about this one." The alliance wanted Hearing Examiner James O'Connor, who handled the case last summer, to order a new environmental-impact statement, which requires public input. Instead, he ordered the trenching. Christopher Schwarzen: 425-783-0577.Caption:  photo,mapMike Siegel / The Seattle Times : Elizabeth Barnett of the U.S. Geological Survey works in a trench at the proposed Brightwater sewage-treatment plant site. USGS officials suspect strands of the Southern Whidbey Island fault extend through the area. (0394811361)The Seattle Times: Moving forward (GPSOFMCJ)
