RANDLE, Lewis County — Herds of hungry elk come down from the shady green hills in early morning and early evening, stopping by a former dairy farm where a woman with roots in Seattle's alternative-art scene has put up a teepee and put down an Airstream trailer. As the animals graze on overgrown grass, they must be thinking: "Who is this woman, and what is she doing here?" Three years ago, Jackie Ransier was asking herself the same question. Her Pioneer Square photography gallery had shut down because of damage from the Nisqually earthquake in February 2001. Her day job at the phone company had ended and her romantic relationship was over after more than a decade. Her two children grown, her relaxed routine blown, Ransier turned to something that could bring order and purpose back to her life. She went back to school. "The best thing someone can do is get an education and try something new," said Ransier, 51, a photographer who graduated in June from Seattle Central Community College's wood-construction program. With the advent of autumn, children across the Puget Sound region have started school. But thousands of other students, many of them older, also are embarking upon academic journeys, looking to school as a way to triumph over circumstance. They will be among those starting classes later this month at trade schools and community colleges, such as Seattle Central, where fall quarter begins Sept. 27. Before Ransier enrolled, her carpentry experience was limited to hammering a nail into a wall to hang pictures. Yet she set her sights high. "My goal from the beginning was to build my own house," she said. The time is nigh. On her five acres southwest of Mount Rainier National Park, Ransier visualizes a structure of wood and glass, funky yet functional. A ground-level barn to house her horses, including a 3-year-old bay quarter horse named Cheyenne. Above it, a studio, a gathering place for her artist friends from the city and her neighbors in the country. A curved roofline. Lots of windows. "I love building, I love horses, and I love art, and I am hoping it will all come together in one nice space," Ransier said. Melding two lifestyles Ransier studied photography at Shoreline Community College in the late 1980s. Her portraits of local band The Gits and its singer Mia Zapata were displayed during the sentencing earlier this year of Zapata's murderer. Ransier shares time between her apartment in Seattle's Wallingford neighborhood, where she has lived for 18 years, and her property in Randle. The Wallingford place, which she shares with two artists, is a converted dentist's office above a Mexican restaurant. The works of photographers who exhibited at the gallery she partly owned, FotoCircle, are displayed against walls painted red. The shops and restaurants that line North 45th Street exist on a different planet than the coyote, yellow jackets and bear that inhabit Randle. But Ransier believes she can marry the two lifestyles. "My intention is to make the best of both worlds." After giving up her 10-year job as a data specialist at Qwest so a co-worker with a young family and less seniority could keep his, Ransier entered Seattle Central's worker-retraining program and enrolled in the four-quarter wood-construction program. "She always has been adventurous," said Julie Lucas, who met Ransier 14 years ago after hiring her to photograph her and her infant daughter. "She views every point of her life as a beginning. She took advantage of an opportunity she had, and she went for it." Ransier walked into her first class scared. She wanted to stand tall, but stood only 5 foot 1. She was one of the oldest students and one of few women. "There were lots of obstacles along the way that could have put her down, but didn't," said Lucas, a publisher and seller of multilingual books. Carpentry instructor Frank Mestemacher said Ransier at first struggled with using a heavy worm drive saw, a standard tool used by framers. Her cutting lines weren't straight and she asked to bring a lighter, easier-to-use saw from home. During Ransier's final quarter, though, Mestemacher observed as another student sought Ransier's help in cutting a two-by-four with the same saw she once couldn't handle. "She picked up the saw and, without hesitation, just did it," Mestemacher said. The instructor was so impressed, he invited Ransier to deliver this year's keynote speech at the wood-carpentry program's annual appreciation luncheon. "A community project" Ransier hopes to lay the foundation of her Randle barn-and-studio once she secures a building permit from Lewis County and to finish construction in two years. She will rely on the help of her son, a few Seattle friends and a new boyfriend, a carpenter she met five months ago. She also will seek help from neighbors in and around River Run Ranch, the platted former dairy farm that borders a milky white stretch of the Cowlitz River. "It's going to be a community project," Ransier said. "I plan to build this house almost exclusively out of materials people give me." Inside the former barn, now owned by a neighbor, Ransier stores discarded doors, window frames, lighting fixtures, paint, cedar fencing, sheets of plywood and two-by-whatevers she has picked up for free as surplus or purchased at huge discounts. Earlier in the summer, Ransier and her boyfriend built a porch for her silver 1971 Airstream, using scrap wood from a deck ripped out from a house on Phinney Ridge in Seattle. They sketched the design on the back of a pizza box. The porch sits on concrete blocks, which were the only materials Ransier had to buy — at about $5 apiece. In the spring, the couple raised the teepee, which is 16 feet in diameter and can hold about five people comfortably. Neighbors visit her there, where they drink beer and sit next to the fire pit, the smoke from the flames escaping through a flap in the canvas. Ransier is earning money at such odd jobs as light carpentry, painting, hay-baling and tree-cutting. "This whole dream is going for broke," she said. If she ends up taking a desk job, she won't consider it a failure: "If you have to make a change in your life to be happy, do it. People don't, and they end up miserable." Stuart Eskenazi: 206-464-2293 or seskenazi@seattletimes.comCaption:  photo,mapKen Lambert / The Seattle Times : Jackie Ransier with Cheyenne and another horse buddy near her spread in Randle, Lewis County. (0394674914)Ken Lambert / The Seattle Times : Jackie Ransier took a community-college wood-construction program so she could build her own house in the country. She is shown with some of the supplies she is collecting for the project. (0394674916)The Seattle Times: Randle, Wa. (G8UO1S1Q)
