IMZOUREN, Morocco — Earthquake survivors from Morocco's minority Berber community accused the government of abandoning them yesterday, a day after a temblor hit their neglected northern region. Nearly 600 people were killed, hundreds more wounded and thousands left homeless. As help began arriving from around the world, about 200 angry people marched along a roughhewn road in the hard-hit village of Imzouren, shouting, "People are dying, and nothing has been done for them!" The earthquake, which partially leveled a half-dozen villages near the north Mediterranean city of Al Hoceima, triggered a wave of discontent over the variety of ills that plague this underdeveloped area of northern Morocco that is largely populated by non-Arab Berbers. King Mohammed VI had planned to visit the quake zone, which is home to Morocco's Berber minority and one of the most underdeveloped areas of the Mediterranean basin. Berbers, who have their own language, are considered the original inhabitants of North Africa. Mohammed's father, the late King Hassan II, quashed a rebellion of Berber tribes in 1958, but the present king has taken steps to integrate the north more fully into this Muslim kingdom, financing infrastructure projects. Spanish and Moroccan rescue teams with sniffer dogs searched for victims of Tuesday's earthquake among mud-brick homes and concrete apartments that crumbled as the 6.5-magnitude temblor struck at 2:30 a.m. The quake shook areas near the coastal city of Al Hoceima, between the Rif Mountains and the Mediterranean Sea. The city was largely spared, but surrounding villages such as Imzouren were devastated. About 564 people were killed and some 300 were injured, the official MAP news agency reported. But the death toll was expected to rise as rescuers made their way to hard-to-reach rural areas, the international Red Cross in Geneva said. Survivors headed into another rainy, blustery night in makeshift tents fashioned from plastic sheeting. Military officers put up hundreds of tents in and around Al Hoceima. The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies appealed for money to pay for tents, blankets, mattresses, heaters and food. The Red Cross was also sending a seven-member assessment team. Aid began pouring in from Europe and the United States. France, Morocco's former colonial ruler, sent 15 rescuers and their search dogs. Portugal sent a 29-member rescue team and six sniffer dogs. Belgium sent tents, water-purification kits, generators, medicine and 20 personnel. The Finnish Red Cross sent clothing, tents and a logistics officer. The United States was sending shipments from warehouses in Italy and elsewhere that included 10,000 blankets, tents, water-pumping and -purification units, water containers, hygiene kits, generators and other items. Kuwait also pledged help.Caption:  mapThe Associated Press: Magnitude 6.5 quake kills hundreds (GT6KCVE2)
