Experts have roundly criticized the premise of the NBC miniseries " 10.5," which concludes tonight. But they agree earthquakes are a fact of life in the Pacific Northwest. Here are some steps to get ready before one strikes. If you do nothing else ... • Be prepared to spend 72 hours without utilities, medical help or communications. The Pacific Northwest is a geologically active region, and sizable if not catastrophic earthquakes are inevitable. • Strap your hot-water heater to the wall. An upright water heater is less likely to break its connection and leak gas after an earthquake, and it can be a source of drinking water through the hotwater taps. • Start an emergency kit and create a family emergency plan. Other measures Structural safety • If your home is not subject to modern building codes, make sure the house is bolted to its foundation. • Strap gas appliances to walls or secure them to floors. • Know how to turn off gas, electricity and water. Have on hand the necessary tools. If you live in an apartment, know where your building’s utility controls are and how to use them. • Evaluate each room. Ask yourself: If the residence began shaking, what would topple? How can I secure it? • Store household chemicals safely, preferably near the floor. Personal know-how • Know the safe zones of your home: away from masonry or large windows; in strong doorways, under major beams; in rooms without tall furniture or loose objects; beneath sturdy tables. • Hold a home evacuation drill. Have a plan for reuniting the family. Anticipate transportation failures or detours. Choose both a nearby meeting place and an out-of-state relative to be a check-in contact for everyone. • Educate your children. Obtain a copy of your school district’s disaster policy regarding transportation and the release of students. Keep photos of family members in your wallet, in case they turn up missing. • Take a first aid course. Learn cardiopulmonary resuscitation. • Know where the nearest police and fire stations are. Know the route to the nearest hospital emergency room. Keep critical phone numbers by your phone and in your wallet. • Meet your neighbors and find out their medical or other expertise. Plan to unite if your neighborhood becomes isolated. When it hits Indoors • Duck under a sturdy table or desk. Cover your head and face to prevent injury from glass and debris. Grab a leg of the furniture piece and be prepared to move with it if the shaking is severe. • If there is no suitable table or desk, move away from windows to a major wall or doorway and cover your head and face. • Avoid objects that could fall. • Don’t go outside, or use stairs or elevators, until the shaking stops. • In a crowded public place such as a store or stadium, do not rush to the exit. Move away from objects that could fall, such as shelves, but stay inside until the shaking stops. Outdoors • Move to an open area. • In the back country, move away from cliffs and steep embankments where there might be falling debris or a landslide. After the quake, get away from river beds. A major quake could send large amounts of water and mud downstream. • If you are near a body of water, move to high ground to escape a potential tsunami - a wave caused by water displaced in seismic activity. If the epicenter is near, you could have only a few minutes before such a wave would hit. In transit • If you are driving, stop your vehicle away from buildings, bridges and utility lines and stay inside until the shaking stops. Turn on car radio to find out what routes are open before proceeding and beware of hazards such as potentially weakened bridges. • If you are on foot near tall buildings, duck into a doorway to avoid falling glass and debris. After it hits Is everyone OK? • Provide first aid and a safe place for anyone who is injured. • Call 911 or other emergency phone numbers only if injuries are serious or the situation is life-threatening. Phone lines will be jammed, and increased calls can hamper rescue efforts. Shelter • Check for hazards such as fire, leaks, chemical spills and precarious structures. • Natural-gas companies ask customers not to turn off their gas service at the meter unless they smell or hear a leak. If they smell gas coming from within their home, they should call their gas company from a phone outside their home. It’s important not to touch electric switches or use the telephone until the situation is corrected. It is necessary to call the gas company to get service restored. • If you have an electrical generator, do not hook it up to your home’s wiring. Sending that current out to the poles can create a severe danger of electrocution for power-service workers. • In the case of a severe quake that displaces many people, locations of nearby shelters would be announced through media. Water • Stockpile water. Fill your bathtub. Your community’s supply might be limited due to broken mains. Be prepared to treat, filter or boil contaminated water. Food • If the electricity is out, put thermometers in the refrigerator and freezer and open the doors only when necessary. • Refrigerated foods should be OK for about 8 hours, holding a temperature of 40 degrees, unless the door is opened often. • If the power comes on within the eight hours, anything with an "off" odor should be thrown out. All meats, fish and poultry should be cooked, then frozen for later use. Label this food as having been cooked after the power outage, use it first, and if there is an "off" odor during cooking, throw it out. • Food in a freezer of 12 cubic feet or more should stay frozen for 48 hours if the freezer is full and the door kept closed. Under those same conditions, food should keep safely cold for up to 72 hours. • If the thermometer in the freezer registers 40 degrees or lower when power returns, and if there are ice crystals in the food, it is safe to refreeze it. • If you are left more than 48 hours without power, add dry ice to the freezer. • No dry ice after 48 hours? If the food is thawed but still 40 degrees, throw out vegetables and casseroles containing meat, fish, eggs, cheese and cream sauce, even if they are still cold, because of possible bacterial growth. Then cook and refreeze all uncooked foods except fruits and jams. • If the freezer temperature is above 40 degrees, throw out all food. Aftershocks • The timing, frequency and severity of aftershocks depend on the epicenter and nature of the original quake. Assess your home • An estimated 125,000 wood-frame houses within Seattle, and as many as 250,000 throughout King County, are vulnerable to earthquakes, according to government estimates. However there are established ways homeowners can retrofit their homes to resist structural damage. Information, including a list of trained contractors and contacts in regional cities and counties, is available from Project Impact, a Federal Emergency Management Agency program. Check the Web site, www.ci.seattle.wa.us/projectimpact or call 206-615-0288. Vital supplies • Keep drinking water stored in a dry, cool place where it is least likely to be buried by debris. Four gallons per person could last a week. Keeping drums of water outside the home will protect them from structural collapse. Stock an unexpired supply of water-purification tablets or a backcountry filtering device in case of contamination. • Have a well-stocked first aid kit and a handbook. • Compile a portable supply of toiletries and medications you routinely need. Keep a stash of cash hidden somewhere. Banks and teller machines might be shut down. • Store valuable documents in a fireresistant strong box. • Carry a multi-purpose pocket knife. Have a crowbar on hand to open jammed doors. Stock goggles and dust masks, rope and plastic sheeting and duct tape for covering broken windows and temporary repairs. • Keep non-perishable food stored in a safe, dry place. Stock items that don’t have to be cooked. Remember a can opener. • Camping gear should be organized and accessible should emergency shelter be necessary. Make sure that your camp stove is working and you have fuel. • Have a portable radio and fresh batteries. If you are hearing-impaired, buy a small battery-powered television. • Keep flashlights, batteries, candles and waterproof matches handy. • If you are elderly or infirm, carry a whistle around your neck. Arrange for a neighbor to look in on you. Chimneys inadequately tied to the structure can crumble or fall. Consult an engineer to inspect the chimney and devise a proper bracing system. Glue a restraining lip around desk tops and along the front of shelves to prevent falling objects. Use plastic, not porcelain hanging planters. Place emergency power failure lights (constantly charging flashlights) in hallways, bathrooms and bedrooms. Remove from sockets for portability. Make sure all family members know how and when to turn off the gas. If you smell gas after an earthquake, shut off the meter valve found at the first fitting located on the supply pipe coming out of the ground. Use a wrench to turn the valve either way until it is perpendicular to the pipe. Keep a wrench attached to the gas meter with a wire. Call the gas company to get service restored. Use metal plumbers tape to strap water heater to studs in the wall. Use a hose to obtain drinking water from your water heater’s drain valve in an emergency. If water supply is cut off by an earthquake, drinking water is still available in your home in water heaters, toilet tanks, in-house plumbing and melted ice cubes. Place heavy objects and electronic equipment on lower shelves to minimize damage. Place a beanbag of sand or shot in the bottom of vases and other porcelain containers to help hold them down. Velcro patches can be used to anchor objects on to shelves. Store large drums of water outside. Replace water every six months. Keep a flashlight, spare batteries and sturdy shoes under the bed. Shoes will protect you from broken glass on the floor. Securely fasten mirrors onto dressers. Do not lean them against the wall. Wall mirrors should be hung on double hooks. Use heavy double-sided tape on the back to help keep them on the wall Close blinds at night to prevent possible broken glass from flying into the room. Place bed away from windows and threat of broken glass. Family members should know how to shut off water if a quake causes a leak in the house. The water shut-off valve is the first valve in the line after it enters the house. To shut off the electricity, turn off single breakers first, then switch off main breaker. Pull the main fuse blocks out on older panels. Purchase a portable, gas-powered generator for emergency electricity. Only appliances that can use extension cords should be attached to a generator. A 2200-watt unit can power a refrigerator and several lamps. Keep fuel in a safe, protected container. Additional fuel can be siphoned from cars. Keep a large multi-purpose dry chemical fire extinguisher (ABC rating) near kitchen and garage appliances. All family members should be instructed how to use it. Keep instructions on the canister. A major cause of quake-related injuries is falling debris. Stay inside until your pathway is safe from falling objects. Secure appliances and tall furniture to walls. Appliances could move and rupture gas or electrical lines. Furniture could topple, causing damage and injuries. Consult a structural engineer to make sure your home is bolted to the foundation and that the structure is properly reinforced. Check roof, foundation and walls for cracks and overall condition. Protect porcelain dinnerware by installing child-proof latches on cabinet doors. After an earthquake, eat refrigerated food first, frozen food next and dried or canned food last. Remember to keep spare food on hand for pets. Disaster information To take first aid/ CPR class or to get disaster-preparedness material, call an American Red Cross chapter: King County, 206-323-2345 Pierce County, 253-474-0400 Snohomish County, 425-252-4103, Ext. 18 Kitsap County, 360-377-3761 For a brochure on what to put in a survival kit for home, car and work, or a brochure on how to make a disaster plan, send a request with a stamped, legalsize, selfaddressed envelope to: American Red Cross Serving King and Kitsap Counties P.O. Box 3097 Seattle, WA 98114-3097 Or find earthquake disaster information online at www.redcross.org/services/disaster/01082058300.html For more information and material on disaster preparedness contact the following: City of Seattle Division of Emergency Management 2320 4th Ave., Seattle, 98121 206-233-5076 King County Office of Emergency Management, 3511 NE Second St. Renton, 98056 206-296-3830 Pierce County Department of Emergency Management County City Building, Rm B36, 930 Tacoma Ave. S., Tacoma, 98402 253-798-7470 Snohomish County Department of Emergency Management 3509 109th St. S. W., Everett, 98204, 425-423-7635 A free online course, " Surviving an Earthquake," is at www. regionxoti. org, through the University of Washington’s Continuing Education program. Source: American Red Cross, Bay Area Regional Earthquake Preparedness Project, Los Angeles Fire DepartmentCaption:  illustrationThe Seattle Times: Living in earthquake country - How to be prepared  ** Graphic only - available only in MediaGrid ** (GH4LK2ME)
