ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — Moved by an earthquake that unleashed death and destruction on both sides of divided Kashmir, Pakistani and Indian leaders agreed yesterday to at least temporarily scale back barriers that have kept families apart for 58 years. During a visit to Muzaffarabad, the quake-ravaged capital of the region of Kashmir that Pakistan controls, President Pervez Musharraf appealed to New Delhi to allow Kashmiris to cross the de-facto border and bring aid to suffering relatives. "We will allow every Kashmiri to come across the Line of Control [LOC] and assist in the reconstruction effort," Musharraf said during a news conference after touring the flattened city of 600,000, also suggesting that leaders from both countries meet and collaborate. India responded with uncommon swiftness. "We welcome the offer," the Foreign Ministry said in a statement. "This is in line with India's advocacy of greater movement across the LOC for relief work and closer people-to-people contacts." It was the latest and most significant confidence-building gesture to follow the Oct. 8 earthquake. Earlier, India sent three shipments of relief goods and agreed to temporarily suspend the "no-fly" zone over the de-facto border to allow Pakistani helicopters to deliver aid and evacuate the injured. Musharraf and Indian Prime Minister Manmohan Singh have been unusually cooperative since the quake took its harshest toll on Kashmir. India and Pakistan — which have fought two wars over the territory since gaining independence in 1947 — also said they would allow Kashmiris to make telephone calls to the other side to check on loved ones. But analysts in both countries are not sanguine about the prospects for long-term rapprochement. Neighborly support in a time of crisis is a typically Eastern custom, they say, not to be mistaken for relinquishing entrenched positions. The earthquake is "a blip on the radar screen," said Vinod Saighal, a retired Indian general and author. "The reason is that the underlying tensions are far more deep. The entities that impel them forward are not going to change their stance." New Delhi cut communications between its Jammu-Kashmir state and all of Pakistan in 1990 in an effort to stymie an Islamic insurgency that it charged was being run from Pakistan. Islamabad denies the allegation. Meanwhile yesterday, Pakistani and U.S. military helicopters were delivering aid to hard-hit Muzaffarabad, which has become a relief-distribution hub for survivors of the earthquake. But the U.N. World Food Program (WFP) warned that 500,000 earthquake survivors have yet to receive supplies. "The situation is really disastrous," said Turkish relief worker Tayyar Wardar, a member of an emergency medical team that flew to Sarli Sachan, the area where the girl died. "They had no medicine, or food. Nobody had been there until now." Material from The Associated Press is included in this report.
