There's no denying a major earthquake on the Seattle Fault would be nasty. But there are many ways to prevent a bad situation from being even worse, said several participants at an earthquake workshop yesterday in Bellevue — a scant mile from where the fault slices through the city of 117,000. "The emphasis today is not on how bad things are, but how with this knowledge we can actually change the scenario," said Craig Weaver, coordinator for the U.S. Geological Survey's Pacific Northwest Earthquake program. Nearly 500 emergency planners, government officials, geologists and engineers crowded into a hotel ballroom to hear a detailed scenario that maps out the impact of a magnitude-6.7 earthquake that ruptures a 14-mile stretch of the fault, which roughly parallels Interstate 90 from Elliott Bay to Issaquah. The picture, generated from computer models and local analysis of ground-shaking and building types, is grim: 1,600 people killed, 24,000 injured, $33 billion in damage, and an economy and transportation system in tatters. The shaking would be strong enough to cause major damage from Puget Sound to the Snoqualmie Valley and from Seattle's Lake City neighborhood to Kent. "The scenario earthquake will rival the largest natural disaster to hit the nation to date," Bellevue Mayor Connie Marshall said. "Each individual needs to be prepared." Scientists say the fault has unleashed four similar earthquakes in the past 3,000 years. Studying the fault over the past decade, geologists have developed maps that pinpoint the areas of loose soils and steep slopes that are most vulnerable in a quake, said Susan Chang, a specialist in earthquake-resistant design who helped write the new report. With that information, businesses and governments can zero in on the highest-risk structures, most of which can be retrofitted sufficiently to keep them from collapsing and killing anyone inside. Some of the easiest types of buildings to retrofit are also among the most hazardous: tilt-up concrete structures commonly used for megastores and warehouses. By strengthening the attachment between the walls and roof, it's possible to greatly reduce the chance that the roof will collapse, said Mark Pierepiekarz, president of the Seattle Chapter of the Structural Engineers Association of Washington. Businesses can contribute by helping their employees develop family disaster plans, said Jacqueline Meszaros, an engineering professor at the University of Washington, Bothell, and program director for risk management at the National Science Foundation. Workers who know their family members are safe won't have to leave their jobs and add to the general chaos after a big earthquake hits, Meszaros explained. Homeowners can also assess their own risk by evaluating the age of their house and its general location. The simplest and most effective fix is to bolt the house to the foundation — a job that costs $3,000 to $7,000, or about $500 for do-it-yourselfers, said Ines Pearce, an earthquake program manager for Seattle's Emergency Management section. About 250,000 homes in the Puget Sound region were built before 1980, when more-modern earthquake construction codes took effect. The scenario estimates that 5,700 homes would be destroyed and 18,500 damaged so extensively that residents wouldn't be able to live in them for up to six months. Another 130,300 homes would be moderately damaged, many of them uninhabitable for weeks or months. Meszaros conducted more-detailed impact scenarios for three of the region's business districts: Pioneer Square, Renton's historic downtown, and a typical suburban strip mall in Issaquah. While the newer buildings in Issaquah probably would survive with moderate damage, many small businesses would fail in the face of disruptions that would keep customers away. Downtown Renton, with its picturesque brick buildings, would be a near-total loss. Pioneer Square, where about two-thirds of historic brick buildings have been retrofitted, would fare slightly better in terms of building loss but would be so economically devastated by destruction of the Alaskan Way Viaduct that the district might never recover, Meszaros said. Many of the steps the report's authors call for are big-ticket fixes, such as the $4 billion plan to replace the rickety viaduct, and accelerating the state's schedule for upgrading freeway bridges. While it's difficult to find big chunks of money, it's possible to plan for upgrades as part of government's normal business, Marshall said. Bellevue, for example, is spending $11.5 million to convert an old office building to house city government, police, fire and emergency departments. Much of the money is going for extensive seismic upgrades. "People say: Why is that building costing so much?" she said. "Well, it's going to be standing when a lot of other things are not." Sandi Doughton: 206-464-2491 or sdoughton@seattletimes.com More information Seattle Fault scenario report available in mid-March: seattlescenario.eeri.org/ Northwest earthquake information: geology.wr.usgs.gov/wgmt/pacnw/rescasp1.html Seattle Fault and other faults in the region: earthquake.usgs.gov/regional/pacnw/actflts/sfz/ Seismic retrofits, including low-cost classes: www.seattle.gov/projectimpact or call 877-2-BOLT-IT
