MUZAFFARABAD, Pakistan — Hundreds of people, most of them children, have contracted pneumonia in Pakistan's earthquake-stricken zone as harsh winter weather sets in, health officials said Tuesday. But the United Nations and government officials denied reports of any cold-related deaths so far in the region where more than 73,000 people were killed in the Oct. 8 earthquake. The quake left more than 3 million people homeless in Pakistani Kashmir and adjoining North West Frontier Province, which bore the brunt of the biggest disaster in Pakistan's 57-year history. The Himalayan region got its first harsh winter weather over the weekend with up to 8 inches of snow falling at some altitudes and up to 1.2 inches of rain in some lower areas, bringing relief operations grinding to a halt. Aid agencies are racing to ensure that homeless survivors get adequate shelter and enough food to see them through the winter. Failing this, disease could sweep through cold, poorly nourished survivors, causing a second wave of deaths, aid officials say. The earthquake also killed about 1,300 people on the Indian side of the disputed Kashmir region. Relief operations resumed Monday after the weather cleared, but the cold has persisted. Sardar Mehmood Ahmed, district health officer in Muzaffarabad, the devastated capital of Pakistani Kashmir, said pneumonia was common in Kashmir during the winter but said it would be worse this year because so many people were living in poor shelter. U.N. and Health Ministry officials denied reports that two or three people had died because of the cold. The U.N. Children's Fund said there had as yet been no dramatic increase in the number of patients suffering from cold-related diseases. "There has not been any confirmation of cold-related deaths. It is a little bit too early to speak about the consequences of the cold weather because it has just started," said UNICEF health officer Tamur Mueenuddin. Authorities hope people in high-altitude settlements will come down to tent villages on valley floors for the winter, but most people have chosen to stay with their ruined homes. This month Pakistan won pledges worth more than $6 billion from world donors for relief and reconstruction operations in the quake-hit zone. But most was earmarked for long-term reconstruction, while U.N. and other aid officials say funds are short for a six-month emergency operation.
