Pets and Earthquakes:<EM> </EM><EM>We're hoping that since the big Nisqually earthquake of 2001 (tomorrow, it will have been four years!), you already have your family's emergency kit packed and ready. But you might not have thought about quake care for Fido and Fluffy. Here's a list of ways to assure your pets' safety before, during and after an earthquake:</EM> Before an earthquake: • Have a hard-sided carrier for each pet. • Keep a 72-hour supply of pet food and bottled water. • Create an emergency kit of first-aid items, medications, leash, doggie pick-up bags and cat litter. • Make sure each of your pets has a microchip ID and an ID tag on its collar. • Train your pet to come when called. • Have a current picture of each pet, in case he becomes lost. Keep copies of your pet's health records, too. During an earthquake: • Call your pet to your place of safety and place him in his carrier. • Do not try to hold your pet during the shaking. Animals will protect themselves instinctively and hide where they're safe. If you get in their way, even the nicest pet can turn on you. After an earthquake: • Do not let your pet loose outside. • Watch to see that your pet avoids contaminated water or items such as spilled antifreeze. And watch out for frayed or downed electrical lines. • Remember that if your home is not safe for you, it isn't safe for your pet, either. Emergency evacuation centers will not accept your pet, so you'll need to find somewhere safe for him. If your pet becomes lost: • Contact your local animal-control agency and file a lost-animal report. • Bring a photo of your pet to the agency and visit frequently to look for your pet. • Place notices throughout your neighborhood and area veterinary clinics. Sources: The Humane Society of Seattle/King County, the California Governor's Office of Emergency Services and The Pet Place.Caption:  photoGreg Gilbert / The Seattle Times : During an earthquake, call your pet to your place of safety and place him in his carrier. (0325706605)
