NEW DELHI — Unlike the massive 9.0 magnitude earthquake that killed hundreds of thousands last December, Monday night's 8.7 earthquake spawned no tsunami waves of destruction. But for government officials, this week's powerful quake — among 10 of the strongest ever recorded — was a crucial test of the early-warning systems they have in place, and one that exposed serious flaws. Among the countries with quicker responses were Thailand and Sri Lanka. Thai police with loudspeakers fanned out to order thousands of residents and tourists to evacuate. Slower on the draw were India and Indonesia. India's tsunami warning came at 11:30 p.m., nearly two hours after the quake. In Indonesia, thousands of coastal residents didn't wait for government warnings. They felt the quake and fled. Compared with the Dec. 26 disaster, the death toll from this latest temblor was relatively low — anywhere from 300 to 2,000 predicted deaths, most of them concentrated at Indonesia's Nias Island. Citizens tempered by experience quickly sought safety. And relief efforts from the first quake seem unaffected thus far. But the quake may prod Indian Ocean nations to speed up their response times and create a unified early-warning system like the multination system that operates in the Pacific Ocean. "It's frustrating that with all the seismic networks that give us such good information, we still don't have the capability to quickly determine" the passing of tsunamis, says Costas Synolakis, director of the Tsunami Research Center at the University of Southern California. "What we do know is that people acted as their own tsunami warning system once they felt the earthquake," and headed for high ground, says Art Lerner-Lam, with the Lamont-Doherty Earth Observatory in Palisades, N.Y. For residents of Indonesia's Nias Island, just 19 miles from the epicenter, there wasn't time to respond. Local officials say that the 2-minute-long quake destroyed nearly 80 percent of the island's buildings, trapping or killing residents. But elsewhere, Indonesians knew to seek higher ground, even without warnings. Foreign-aid workers say that the roads of Aceh's capital city of Banda quickly jammed with vehicles heading inland. Thousands of residents spent the night outdoors, as 12 major aftershocks followed the first massive quake at 11:09 p.m. Indonesian time. Officials with the government's disaster-management task force said that there was still no fully functioning tsunami early-warning alert system like that in the Eastern Pacific. The U.N. estimates a similar system will be in place by 2006. Thailand has begun installing early-warning towers along Phuket's beaches. The towers link to a national disaster center and are designed to relay information to radio and TV stations and send text messages to Thailand's 20 million mobile-phone users. Towers in Patong Beach in Phuket, the first to be installed, broadcast a warning Monday night that was heard at least a mile away. Even without this system fully in place, Thailand issued a tsunami warning about 30 minutes after the quake. Police with loudspeakers fanned out along the resorts to order tourists and residents to evacuate. A flurry of phone calls and text messages sent a tremor of panic. Low-tech methods also proved useful in spreading the word, said Alisdair Forbes, managing editor of the Phuket Gazette. "People were telling each other and banging on doors. ... It worked pretty well, even though the warning system isn't yet in place," he said. A Thai official assigned to oversee the warning system said the response was encouraging. "We did a better job than the last tsunami, but it wasn't perfect," said Smith Thammasaroj.Caption:  photo, mapChoo Youn-Kong / AFP/Getty Images : Rows of buildings were damaged by Monday night's 8.7 earthquake in Gunungsitoli, the capital of Indonesia's Nias Island.The Associated Press: Indonesia hit again by major quake
