In Sigmund Schwarz's technical world, boring had nothing to do with being dull. A highly respected engineering geologist and geophysicist, Mr. Schwarz gained an international reputation among colleagues as a Northwest pioneer in interpreting gravity, magnetic, electrical and seismic data to determine suitable building sites for dams and other projects. He consulted with the Army Corps of Engineers on site selection for the Howard Hanson Dam and Reservoir east of Enumclaw and for the Packwood Hydroelectric Project south of Mount Rainier. He was a consultant for the alignment of what became the westbound Interstate 90 floating bridge across Lake Washington, and was a consultant for construction of the 50-story 1001 Fourth Avenue Plaza high-rise in downtown Seattle in the late 1960s. Analyzing soil from bore samples to figure out what was below ground was one of his specialties. "He was one of the pioneers in the field of geophysical exploration for engineering purposes in the Northwest," said Bill Laprade, a vice president at the Seattle geotechnical and environmental-engineering firm Shannon & Wilson, where Mr. Schwarz was a vice president and associate for two decades. "He was way ahead of his time." According to daughter Linda Schwarzuntlake Terrace, Mr. Schwarz had worked on more than 100 dam sites and 20 nuclear-power-plant sites. The longtime Kenmore resident, who had made his retirement home in Astoria, Ore., three years ago, died of pneumonia Oct. 4 at Evergreen Hospital Medical Center in Kirkland. He was 77. Reared in Portland, Mr. Schwarz, with an undergraduate degree in geology from Oregon State University, began his career with the Oregon State Highway Department. He was a founder of Geo-Recon of Oregon, a geophysical exploration firm in Salem. In 1958, he and his wife, Mary Kay, moved to the Seattle area, and Geo-Recon became a subsidiary of Shannon & Wilson. There, he was senior geologist/geophysicist until 1979, said his daughter. In later years, he established a consulting firm, S.D. Schwarz & Associates, in Kenmore. Mr. Schwarz developed the first accelerometer-based earthquake measuring sensor, an instrument still used worldwide today, said Tom Bumala of Seattle, a former Geo-Recon employee who had worked with Mr. Schwarz in Oregon and Washington. He and his wife were married 45 years before her death here in 1997. Survivors include a son, David Schwarz, of Marysville; another daughter, Sally Beahan, of Bothell; two grandchildren; and his companion of recent years, Alberta Putnam of Fair Oaks, Calif. Also surviving is a brother, G. Robert Schwarz of West Linn, Ore. A memorial service will be held at 11 a.m. Saturday at Bothell's Inglewood Presbyterian Church, 7718 N.E. 141st St., with burial at Floral Hills Cemetery in Lynnwood. Remembrances may be made to the Fort Clatsop Historical Association's Fort Rebuild Fund, 92343 Fort Clatsop Road, Astoria, OR 97103; the Evergreen Aviation Museum, 500 N.E. Capt. Michael King Smith Way, McMinnville, OR 97128-8877, or the Association of Environmental and Engineering Geologists' Norman R. Tilford Scholarship Fund, P.O. Box 460518, Denver, CO 80246. Charles E. Brown: 206-464-2206 or cbrown@seattletimes.comCaption:  photoSigmund Schwarz analyzed soil for engineers.
