JAKARTA, Indonesia — The Indonesian government yesterday backed away from an earlier call for foreign troops delivering tsunami relief to be out of the country by March 26. "We would like to emphasize that March 26 is not a deadline for involvement of foreign military personnel in the relief effort," Defense Minister Juwono Sudarsono said after meeting U.S. Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz. Indonesian leaders across the political spectrum have expressed gratitude for the foreign help, but there has been a mounting chorus of concern from both secular and Muslim political parties in recent days about the prospect of meddling in Indonesian affairs. U.N., Tamil leaders meet to discuss aid COLOMBO, Sri Lanka — After a tussle with the Sri Lankan government, the head of the U.N. World Food Program met a Tamil Tiger guerrilla leader yesterday to discuss distribution of food to tens of thousands of tsunami-affected people in rebel-held territories. The government had opposed James Morris' visit to the rebel-controlled areas, citing security issues, and earlier this month had prevented U.N. Secretary-General Kofi Annan from visiting disaster sites under guerrilla control. "We are not involved in politics. We are involved in seeing that people are fed," said Morris. The World Food Program is providing food to 90,000 people in the rebel-held north, and the number is growing, he said. Nordic leaders offer thanks BANGKOK, Thailand — The leaders of Sweden, Norway and Finland arrived here yesterday to thank the nation and its people for helping care for thousands of Nordic tourists caught up in the tsunami disaster. "Many Swedes have given testimony about how they have been helped, not only by Thai authorities but also ordinary Thai citizens," Swedish Prime Minister Goeran Persson said at a news conference with Prime Ministers Matti Vanhanen of Finland and Kjell Magne Bondevik of Norway. The heads of state planned during their two-day visit to meet with Thai and international forensic investigators, local police and others trying to determine the fate of more than 2,000 missing Swedes, Norwegians and Finns, and to travel to the southern resorts of Khao Lak and Phuket, where many people died in the disaster. Canadian couple end search for friends PHUKET, Thailand — After spending days poring over photos of corpses, wandering through tsunami-wrecked beach resorts and prowling through Thai hospital wards, Catherine and David Smith decided to end their search for their two missing friends. The turning point came when the Canadian couple traveled 90 miles north to the Andaman Beach Resort in Khao Lak, where John and Jackie Knill of North Vancouver had stayed. Their hotel had been obliterated. "That removed most, if not all, of the uncertainty," David Smith said. So, joined by two Knill relatives, the Smiths held a memorial service on that beach, with a Buddhist prayer and flowers tossed into the sea. "We said our goodbye. All the time we were looking out to the surf, where everything looked like it should. It was beautiful," David Smith said. Survivors may be forced into camps SAYEUENG, Indonesia — With many towns and villages on Sumatra island leveled, the government says it may force survivors into refugee camps. Indonesia is proposing to build an undetermined number of resettlement camps during the coming months. Brig. Gen. Djunaidi Djahri, said the government would build temporary houses over two or three years, and permanent housing later. "It doesn't make sense for the communities to not move to a refugee camp, because they have lost everything in the tsunami," he said. In any case, he said, the army will not provide aid to villages whose residents refuse to move. Government: Dogs' days are numbered ULLE, Sri Lanka — They are perhaps the most overlooked victims of last month's devastating tsunami, increasingly desperate dogs of all sizes, color and character. And under a new government program, their days are numbered. For three weeks, hundreds of dogs have wandered through the rubble of Ulle in search of food. The animals are too timid to compete with humans for the food that arrives at refugee camps every day, but some are getting meaner, howling at night, joining wandering bands, snarling at one another over the animal carcasses that wash up along the beach. Last weekend, Sri Lankan officials began a dog-eradication program after one person reportedly contracted rabies, presumably after being bitten by a dog. "We really don't want to do this, but dogs are becoming a big problem," said Maj. Shene Gunawadhane, a local army commander. "Our country is at a critical point. ... We simply cannot afford a major rabies outbreak."
