MEDAN, Indonesia — A magnitude-8.7 underwater earthquake struck Indonesia's Sumatran coast yesterday, killing hundreds of people, crushing buildings on the nearby resort island of Nias, and sending fearful coastal residents throughout the region racing to higher ground. An official on Nias described the scene as "extreme panic." Tsunami warnings resounded overnight in many locations on the Indian Ocean, but it appeared no killer waves were produced in the region, where a 9.0 quake and tsunami in December killed more than 200,000 people. Yesterday's quake, which struck about 11 p.m., lasted two minutes and briefly cut electricity in Banda Aceh, in an area of Sumatra Island where at least 100,000 died in the Dec. 26 tsunami. Thousands poured into the streets, where flickering campfires and motorbike and car headlights provided the only lighting. People grabbed small bags of clothes as they fled their tents and homes. Many were crying and jumping into cars and onto motorbikes and pedicabs to head for higher ground. "People are still traumatized, still scared, they are running for higher ground," said Feri, a 24-year-old aid volunteer who goes by one name. Sirens and alarms blared in Sri Lanka, India and Thailand, which were also hit hard in the previous disaster, but fears eased within hours, as officials in countries at risk reported their coasts safe. At 1:45 a.m., Indonesian Metro TV broadcast footage of a man with a megaphone shouting in Indonesian on the streets of Banda Aceh. "The situation has returned to normal," he announced. "The water is not rising. So you can all go back to your homes." The only tsunami reported was a tiny one — 10 inches — at the Cocos Islands, 1,400 miles northwest of Australia. No damage was reported there. Yesterday's earthquake — its epicenter just 110 miles southeast of the earlier temblor — ranks among the 10 biggest quakes since 1900, but was not anywhere as powerful as the December quake. An earthquake's power multiplies by 10 for each full number of its magnitude. A 9.0 quake, for example, is 10 times stronger than an 8.0 quake. Still, an 8.0-plus earthquake usually occurs only every five to 10 years. Hardest hit yesterday was Nias island, 45 miles from the epicenter, where officials described destruction and confirmed 322 deaths. In Jakarta, Indonesian Vice President Jusuf Kalla said this morning that the death toll on Nias could be between 1,000 and 2,000. He said he based his estimate on reports of destruction rather than confirmed deaths. Little destruction and few deaths were initially reported elsewhere. "About the victims, we cannot count them now. We only know there are many buildings flattened," said Zulkifly Sirait, a police sergeant on the island. Nias, a well-known surfing destination, has a population of 638,000. It was hit hard in the December quake, with 340 people reported killed and 10,000 made homeless. Agus Mendrofa, the deputy mayor of the island's main city, Gunungsitoli, said people had fled the seaside town. "Gunungsitoli is now like a dead town," he said. "The situation here is extreme panic." "I see very high flames" The MISNA missionary news agency in Rome, reported that a huge fire was raging early today in Gunungsitoli. "From the window I see very high flames," MISNA quoted Father Raymond Laia as saying by telephone about two miles from the town. "The town is completely destroyed." Another police officer, who identified himself as Nainggolan, said rescuers were trying to pull people out of the rubble, and that many were still panicking because of several aftershocks. "We are busy now trying to pull people or bodies of children from the collapsed building," said Nainggolan, who like many Indonesians uses only one name. "It is very hard also because there is no power. "The situation here is really messy," he said. "Aftershocks keep hitting every half hour, making thousands of people flee their homes and afraid to go home." Although no major tsunami developed, the world responded more efficiently than in December, when tourists and inhabitants on beaches thousands of miles away were hit without warning. Geological centers in the United States and Japan quickly relayed information to governments in regions likely to be affected. "System worked better" "My impression is that the system worked far better this time," U.N. humanitarian chief Jan Egeland said. "Not only did we have surveillance and information [sent out] to the countries, but we also had governments reporting out to the local authorities." Egeland said that despite those encouraging signs, the region still has no fully-functioning warning system comparable to the one that exists for the Pacific Ocean. He said such a system should be ready by 2006. "The problem was always to tell the people, and not to tell somebody in the capitals," Egeland said. "That is what we should have in place really in the course of the next few months, a system where you get down to the fishing villages." Turning to disaster relief, Egeland said there were more than 1,000 international aid workers and several thousand local aid workers in Sumatra alone, as well as trucks, helicopters and other resources, and they were ready to respond. "We should be fine with what we have there," Egeland said. "We started the morning of the 27th of December with virtually nothing and it really hurt our early relief effort after the tsunami." He said helicopters were deploying at first light today to inspect Nias and any other areas near the epicenter to assess damage and casualties from the earthquake. U.S. military operations and personnel in the region were unaffected by the quake, Pentagon spokesman Lt. Cmdr. Greg Hicks said. The nearest U.S. base is on the British island of Diego Garcia in the Indian Ocean, more than 2,000 miles from the quake site. The State Department had no reports of Americans missing. "Where we are right now is having alerted all our posts, been in contact with all our posts, putting ourselves in battle mode to be in a position where we can know what's going on and act appropriately if and when it's necessary," State Department spokesman Adam Ereli said. Red Cross workers OK Embassy officials in the area have been asking host governments to inquire about any casualties to permit an early U.S. response if the situation calls for it, he said. Pat McCrummen, a spokesman for the American Red Cross in Washington, D.C., said the agency confirmed that its workers involved in the relief effort in Indonesia were OK following the latest earthquake. He said Red Cross officials are awaiting further developments before initiating any new relief effort. "We still have people over there assisting from the first one, and they will be our first line of defense, once we know what kind of damage there is," he said. Material from Reuters is included in this report.Caption:  photo, mapThe Associated Press : In this television image, residents flock to the streets in the town of Hadyai, Thailand, after a magnitude 8.7 earthquake struck Indonesia's Sumatran coast late yesterday.Binsar Bakkara / The Associated Press : Acehnese cram onto a scooter and cart as they drive to higher ground following yesterday's earthquake.Knight Ridder Newspapers: Another strong quake hits Indonesia
