TEHRAN, Iran — A powerful earthquake shook central Iran today, destroying villages, killing at least 126 people and injuring more than 500, state-run television reported. The TV broadcast showed a village almost razed to the ground by the 6.4-magnitude quake with few mud-built walls standing. Rescuers in several villages were trying to dig out people buried under rubble, but rain was reportedly hampering rescue efforts. "The death toll now stands at 126. More than 500 people have also been injured," an Interior Ministry spokesman identified as Jahanbakhsh told Iranian state-run television. The epicenter of the quake, which struck at 5:55 a.m. local time, was 35 miles northwest of Kerman, the capital of Kerman province, the U.S. Geological Survey reported. "All hospitals in Zarand are filled to capacity with the injured. Hospitals in the town cannot receive any more of the injured," the broadcast said. Hotkan, Khanook Motaharabad and Islamabad were the worst-hit villages, it said. Kerman provincial governor Mohammad Ali Karimi was quoted as saying that "several villages have been destroyed" by the earthquake. The TV station quoted the governor of Zarand, identified only as Rashidi, as saying that power in the region had been disrupted. He said medical and other supplies were needed, especially medicine, syringes and tents. Zarand, 600 miles southeast of the capital Tehran, is a small town in Kerman province with a population of about 15,000 people. Live pictures on Iranian television showed ambulances carrying the dead and injured and survivors sitting next to the dead, slapping their faces and striking their heads in grief. People were also shown on hospital beds with bloodied clothes and broken limbs. Residents in a village stood next to devastated houses asking for help to rescue their beloved buried under the rubble. "What a catastrophe. Please help us," said one of the survivors. A provincial official said there still was no accurate picture of the depth of the catastrophe but said the quake was not as bad as a killer quake that hit nearby in December 2003. That magnitude-6.6 quake flattened the historic southeastern city of Bam in the same region, killing 26,000 people. Iran is located on seismic fault lines and is prone to earthquakes. It experiences at least one slight earthquake every day on average. The largest recent quake was the Dec. 26 magnitude-9.0 tremor off the coast of Sumatra, Indonesia, launching the tsunami that killed more than 170,000 in South Asia.Caption:  mapThe Associated Press: Zarand, Iran (G13QPHMF)
