"A Crack in the Edge of the World: America and the Great California Earthquake of 1906" by Simon Winchester HarperCollins, 462 pp., $27.95 These things used to be handled better. When San Francisco was hit by earthquake and fire in the early morning of April 18, 1906, San Francisco Mayor Eugene Schmitz had 1,500 U.S. soldiers on the city's streets by noon, helping local police and firemen rescue the trapped, treat the injured, fight the fire and guide the homeless to shelter. He also, more controversially, took shoot-to-kill anti-looting measures, and destroyed some city blocks by trying to create firebreaks against the spreading flames. Schmitz's actions were illegal ("Only the state governor can call in National Guardsmen," writer Simon Winchester tells us, "and only the president can summon federal troops"). But Schmitz was beyond red-tape niceties: "While the orders issued at the time were perhaps without legal authority, and were extraordinary," he later explained, "they were accepted by the people with a good nature and good will." In the meantime, food, fire engines, hoses and dynamite poured in from nearby Oakland and Sacramento. A trainload of food and medicine arrived from Los Angeles within 18 hours of the quake, and 200,000 rations were sent from Washington state's Vancouver Barracks within 24 hours. All this occurred with only one surviving military telephone circuit, two commercial telegraph lines and one trans-Pacific cable (to Manila) out of the city. All internal communications were destroyed, along with 490 city blocks and 28,188 buildings, leaving 225,000 citizens, half the city's population, homeless. Winchester's account of the timely arrival of help to San Francisco can't help but have an unintended, almost distracting relevance to what happened in Katrina-stricken New Orleans. But his new book, "A Crack in the Edge of the World," looks far beyond the specifics of the 1906 earthquake, which figure overtly in only a quarter of its pages. In "Crack," Winchester is going for a big picture of our vibration-prone planet, from the Indian-Asian plate boundary (site of the recent disaster in Kashmir) to the shaky slopes of the Andes. He traces unexpected connections between the 1906 quake and such phenomena as the rise of the Pentecostalist movement, the birth of environmentalism and fluctuations in Chinese immigration policy. His own travels across the U.S. and Canada also figure in his collagelike narrative. Occasionally his context-setting gets a little out of hand. As he trots out Neil Armstrong, Einstein, Freud, Marconi and Henry Ford in his early chapters, it feels as though he can't decide which of a dozen entryways to take into his subject matter. But by Page 57, "Crack" starts coming into focus. Winchester offers a survey of the North American continental plate, from its eastern edge in lava-spewing Iceland to its unpredictable middle (the 1811 New Madrid earthquakes and 1886 Charleston quake get their due) to its western edge along the U.S. Pacific coast. He gives brisk accounts of the rise of plate-tectonic theory, as well as the emergence of a "New Geology" as better understandings of the American West's rugged topography were achieved. He tosses in a social history of California and the Bay Area, emphasizing how early settlers there had no idea what an active seismic zone they'd chosen as their home. He takes a close look at the workings of the San Andreas Fault and berates Californians who choose to live right on top of it. It's more than halfway through the book before he gets to the big 1906 event, and with so many different touchdown points, "Crack" doesn't have the eloquent intensity or unity of Winchester's "The Meaning of Everything" (his history of the making of the Oxford English Dictionary, in which the scholars who started the project came to realize that they would never live to see its completion). Still, the new book is a cut above other recent entries in the ever-growing Catastrophes You May Have Forgotten genre. Winchester doesn't invent dialogue, and with his lively interest in an eclectic array of fields of knowledge — science, history, sociology — he expands the book's range well beyond the schadenfreude appeal of some disaster narratives. The conclusion he draws, concerning "the evanescent nature of even our most impressive achievements," feels well earned. Coming up Simon Winchester The author discusses his new book in a lecture titled "When the World Goes Mad," 7:30 p.m., Wednesday, Seattle Arts & Lectures, Benaroya Hall, Seattle (206-621-2230 or www.lectures.org).Caption:  photoArnold Genthe : In this 1906 photo, people on Sacramento Street watch smoke rise from fires after the San Francisco earthquake.
