Once the poster child for the 2001 Nisqually earthquake, the historic Cadillac Hotel reopened yesterday as the new home for the Klondike Gold Rush National Historic Park Museum. Just four years ago it was slated for demolition. The hotel at Second Avenue South and South Jackson Street, built in 1889, was one of the oldest buildings in Pioneer Square, built six months after Seattle's great fire. The 25-cent-a-night hotel originally catered to men who worked in the coal mines and logging camps, aboard fishing boats and those headed to the Alaska gold rush. It was heavily damaged in the earthquake, with bricks falling on parked cars, and was one of 16 buildings in Pioneer Square "red-tagged" as unsafe for occupancy. The roof collapsed on the Fenix Underground nightclub, housed in the hotel. Part of the building was fenced off, brick and rubble piled up and windows were boarded. After the earthquake, Goodman Financial Services, which owned the hotel, asked the city for permission to raze the building. Goodman said it would cost too much to restore it and was too dangerous to send work crews inside. The city denied the request because officials believed there was a way to stabilize and rebuild the old hotel, and a year after the earthquake Historic Seattle, a nonprofit organization formed in 1974, announced it was buying the building from Goodman. Historic Seattle agreed to pay $2 million for the damaged building and spent another $10.6 million rehabilitating it. The city loaned the money to Historic Seattle, which will repay it. The work to restore the old hotel took 14 months. Yesterday the museum purchased the land the Cadillac sits on for $915,000. Two tenants will lease the building, the Klondike Museum and the National Park Service regional support staff. The museum will be moving two blocks east from its current location, at 117 S. Main St., and will lease the Cadillac's lower two floors, beginning in January. The Park Service will lease the top two floors and will move into the building in October. Mark Blatter, director of real-estate development for Historic Seattle, said the rents will offset the cost of rehabilitating the historic building, although he wouldn't say what the rents will be. "We're a changing city, a living, breathing organism," Mayor Greg Nickels said at yesterday's opening. "You have to be careful to preserve your soul. Buildings like this help do it." Nickels said it was appropriate that the Klondike Museum was moving in, since many of the men who stayed in the hotel in the late 1800s were headed to Alaska for the gold rush. Susan Gilmore: 206-464-2054 or sgilmore@seattletimes.comCaption:  photoAlan Berner / The Seattle Times : The Cadillac Hotel at Second Avenue South and South Jackson Street in Seattle's Pioneer Square was built in 1889. Soon, it'll house the Klondike Gold Rush National Historic Park Museum and some National Park Service offices.The Cadillac Hotel was "red-tagged" as unsafe for occupancy after the Nisqually earthquake in 2001. The nonprofit Historic Seattle bought the building and rehabilitated it.
