PARAS, Pakistan — A full two weeks after the earthquake upended everything, the tide of horror here remains largely unchanged. That is perhaps the most frightening thing of all. In this smashed-up village in the Kaghan Valley, now reachable only by helicopter, the able-bodied still wait for tents. The wounded continue to pour down from the hills. The Pakistani army continues to airlift them to hospitals across the country. And though their numbers are lower than they were a week ago, their conditions in some cases are graver. For two weeks, wounds have festered. Relatively mild injuries have worsened, infections have set in and, in the worst cases, so have gangrene and tetanus. In some cases, doctors say, limbs that would not have required amputation had they received immediate care will now have to go. If a death toll of more than 50,000 were not enough, doctors and relief workers say now the second wave of deaths has begun. "The biggest hazard at the moment are untreated wounds," said Krist Teirlinck, the head of the Belgian mission of the medical relief group Doctors Without Borders. On Friday morning, more than 100 men, wrapped in shawls, showing the signs of 13 nights spent outside, stood politely in line for a tent. Syed Tasneem Shah said he had come here every day for the last 10 days. He had a 1-year-old baby to care for. His wife and elder daughter were dead, his mother badly wounded. "They just say, wait, it will come today, it will come tomorrow," Shah recounted. He waited another day. The problem is not that no one is helping; it is the magnitude of the destruction, and time is the enemy. The aid group Action Contre le Faim, or Action Against Hunger, landed here on Thursday but brought with it only 30 tents. Medical teams have been scouring the hills in search of the injured, but have not a single helicopter to use. With 3 million made homeless, U.N. officials estimated yesterday a shortfall of up to 200,000 tents, not counting those in the pipeline but yet to be delivered. The U.N. resident coordinator in Pakistan, Jan Vandermootele, told reporters in Islamabad that relief had not reached about 10 to 20 percent of those affected, and that 50 more helicopters were urgently needed. Beyond shelter and medical aid, U.N. officials said they also need to ferry food to remote villages before the snows cut them off entirely. One million displaced people will have to be fed for the next six months, they estimated. The snow will come to Paras in less than three weeks. Landslides have already washed away the road to the nearest town, Balakot. The hills were tumbling down even Friday, throwing up vast clouds of red dust, making the river below a muddy red-brown. Nonetheless, Sabir Hussain, a former waiter in his late 20s, trekked down from Paras to a displaced-persons camp being erected on a cornfield in Bassian village, near Balakot, on Friday afternoon. He brought his wife and two of their three children, ages 5 and 12. Where the third one had ended up, whether dead or alive, they still had no clue. But upon arrival and seeing a camp with neither latrines nor lights, Hussain's hopes were punctured like a balloon. "Our little children will die here," he said. With 225 tents sent by UNICEF, the U.N. children's agency, and nearly 800 more expected, relief workers could not put them up fast enough. Women made makeshift cooking stoves of brick and straw. To reach this camp, he and his brothers had walked for two days, bearing his injured wife on a homemade stretcher. With them were 20 children belonging to their extended family, the youngest not even 3 years old. The dead had been left at home. The army medical tent in Balakot received just 500 new patients on Friday, including 200 suffering from direct earthquake-related wounds, compared with the 1,500 patients a day it was taking in shortly after the quake. Among the new arrivals were two with broken backs, 10 with broken legs, 15 with broken arms, 15 with head injuries, and 150 with still-open wounds, all of them infected. Two patients would require amputations. Hospitals in and around Islamabad, where the most seriously injured are sent, have performed 165 amputations in the last 14 days. In Balakot, the commanding officer, Muhammad Younas, said that eight tetanus cases had arrived in the last four days. "That is my nightmare," he said. The World Health Organization said 72 cases of tetanus had been confirmed. After two measles cases were confirmed, UNICEF began a drive on Friday to vaccinate 800,000 children in the camps against the disease. At a makeshift hospital in Mansehra, the nearest big town, the reception desk registered patient No. 1,987 on Friday afternoon. The five beds in the surgical ward were full. In the hallway, Farhat Bibi, from Paras, waited. Her back had been broken two weeks ago. Only after villagers had cleared the road with their hands and the most grievously injured were brought out was it her turn to see a doctor. Only Friday morning, she received her first dose of painkillers.Caption:  photoTomas Munita / The Associated Press : A man crosses a river at a camp for displaced people outside Balakot, Pakistan, yesterday. The massive quake has left more than 3 million homeless.Carsten Koall / Getty Images : Bdullh Aliasghar looks through his broken glasses yesterday in Paras, Pakistan. Harsh conditions are hampering relief efforts in Pakistan, and survivors are still waiting for food, tents and medical care.
