BALAKOT, Pakistan — Pakistani officials predicted yesterday that many more thousands of dead would be found in earthquake-ravaged Kashmir as heavy rains in the Himalayan region drenched homeless survivors in mud and misery. The latest estimate would raise the death toll from the magnitude-7.6 quake in the mountains of northern Pakistan and India to at least 54,000 — a jump of more than 13,000 from the official count of known dead. A spokesman for the prime minister of the region warned that the cold and wet could cause deaths among the 2 million or so people believed to be homeless. About a fifth of the villages in the quake zone remained cut off eight days after the tremor turned villages scattered across lush mountainsides into death traps, and the bad weather over Kashmir halted aid flights by helicopters. Government officials in Islamabad said early yesterday that 39,422 people were confirmed killed in all of Pakistan — at least 26,422 dead in the Pakistani portion of Kashmir and an additional 13,000 in North West Frontier Province. But later yesterday a spokesman for the state-government chief in the Pakistani portion of Kashmir said the death toll in that region alone is believed to be "not less than 40,000." This would mean the quake killed more than 53,000 in all of Pakistan. With 1,350 deaths reported in India's part of Kashmir, that would bring the quake's death toll to more than 54,000. Abdul Khaliq Wasi, a spokesman for Kashmiri Prime Minister Sikandar Hayat Khan, stressed that the 40,000 number for deaths in Pakistani-controlled Kashmir was only "a closest estimate" and did not reflect the number of bodies recovered. Khan gave an even-worse prediction to Pakistan's Geo television. "Some people fear that the death toll could be 100,000 and they may be right," he said. A precise death toll will be difficult to determine, because many bodies are buried under collapsed buildings and landslides. Maj. Gen. Farooq Ahmed Khan, the Pakistani relief commissioner, voiced fears about the chilly downpours that were making conditions even more miserable for quake survivors forced to live in the open. He said 29,000 tents and 118,000 blankets had been distributed in the quake zone, but he estimated that 100,000 tents were needed. The army said medical supplies such as syringes, painkillers and antibiotics also were scarce. U.S. State Department official Geoffrey Krassy said many in the quake zone remained cut off from aid. "About 20 percent of the populated areas have yet to be reached," said Krassy. The military said roads to the valleys of Jehlum, Neelum and Kaghan in Kashmir remained closed by landslides, and it could take several weeks to clear them. In some areas, Pakistani soldiers evacuated injured villagers by carrying them on their backs. An aid worker with a Pakistani nonprofit organization was killed yesterday morning when he walked into the tail rotor of a helicopter as it prepared to leave Balakot to pick up more supplies, state news agency APP reported. Torrential rain halted airborne relief efforts in Kashmir, where the Pakistani military said a relief helicopter crashed in bad weather late Saturday, killing all six soldiers aboard. The MI-17 transport craft was returning to base after flying relief workers to Bagh. Bagh is one of the worst-hit towns, and relief workers have been unable to provide enough tents for residents, let alone for villagers who have streamed in from the mountains. Adding to the housing problems, many people whose homes survived the quake have refused to go back inside, afraid that aftershocks could bring down the weakened structures. "My house is full of cracks, and I won't go inside," said Mumtaz Rathore, huddled under a plastic sheet with his wife and four children.Caption:  photoRafiq Maqbool / The Associated Press : Quake survivors look out of their tent yesterday near Uri, north of Srinagar, India. Tents are in short supply.
