MUZAFFARABAD, Pakistan — The United States is pressing Pakistan to bar extremist Islamic groups that Washington views as terrorists from doing relief work in the country's earthquake-shattered Kashmir region. President Pervez Musharraf has said the groups play an essential humanitarian role and will be monitored but not shut down. This winter's race to aid earthquake survivors also is a contest to influence their future. In Muzaffarabad, the capital of Pakistan-ruled Kashmir, U.S. Army Humvees and sport utility vehicles of American relief officials share rubble-lined streets with truck convoys of extremist groups that the Bush administration considers enemies. This month, U.S. ambassador Ryan Crocker told Pakistani journalists that Pakistan should prevent such groups from doing relief work, which gives them a chance to promote their extremist ideas. The White House repeated the message during Vice President Dick Cheney's Dec. 20 visit to Musharraf, Pakistani news reports said. But if Pakistan shuts down the relief groups cited by Washington, it would risk a popular backlash in the quake zone, said Kashmir residents and intellectuals here. Instead of forcing out religious organizations, they said, Pakistan's government and foreign donors should counter them by taking a clearer lead in relief and development work. While foreign governments have trumpeted the successes of the early relief effort, journalists and aid workers routinely find communities across the devastated mountain region that have barely been helped. In mid-December, nine weeks after the quake, the United Nations had received only 42 percent of the $550 million it sought for emergency relief. In villages across the earthquake zone, residents have praised the religious groups, whom they say were faster and more organized than Pakistan's government and ruling army. "Groups like Jamaat ud-Dawa and al-Rashid Trust ... are doing a great job and getting respect from the people," said Amjad Yousaf Khan, executive director of the Kashmir Institute of International Relations, an independent study group. It's such support that could trigger a backlash against any effort to ban the groups, Khan and others said. Pakistan's government should not crack down, but rather gently ease out extremist groups as part of standardizing the scores of refugee camps being run by a mishmash of charities, a senior Western diplomat said. Pakistani officials "say they are moving in that direction, but it's not happening very quickly," the diplomat said. Kashmir, which has a tradition of moderate and tolerant interpretations of Islam, is a poor seedbed for radical religion, scholars and journalists said. "The anti-foreign sentiment in other parts of Pakistan, you won't hear it here," said Tariq Naqash, correspondent in Kashmir of the Pakistani daily newspaper Dawn. Jamaat ud-Dawa, which is based to the south in Punjab province, "has to moderate its [often anti-Western] message" in Kashmir, he said, to avoid alienating people. Islamic extremists — mainly from the Jamaat-e-Islami party — have won goodwill for years in Kashmir with their charity work "but have not been able to convert this into political power," Mian Abdulwahid, a lawyer, said. In elections in 2001, "We were afraid they would win a big percentage, but they were not able to get a single seat" in the legislature, said Abdulwahid, a leader in Kashmir of the Pakistan People's Party, the country's biggest secular political force. A group whose ouster was suggested by Crocker, the U.S. ambassador, is Jamaat ud-Dawa (The Society of the Call), a charity and missionary society that for years shared its headquarters and its leader with a militia group named Lashkar-i-Toiba (The Army of the Pure). Lashkar-i-Toiba has been one of the main Islamic extremist groups fighting India's control over its portion of Kashmir, and since 2001 it has been named a terrorist group by the State Department and by India. Mohammed Hafiz Sayeed, who headed Lashkar and still runs Jamaat, says the guerrilla group has been disbanded since outlawed by Pakistan after it was blamed for an attack on India's parliament four years ago. He says Jamaat ud-Dawa does only charitable and missionary work from its offices across Pakistan. The real danger of Islamist relief groups radicalizing Kashmir will arise if they play a major role in educating the young generation, especially the tens of thousands of earthquake orphans, said Shah Ghulam Qadir, chairman of the Islamabad-based Kashmir Institute of International Relations. "We, as liberal Muslims, must be prepared to take care of" the orphans, and the education of children of countless destitute families, he said. His institute is designing a program to let supporters sponsor children for education in their villages.Caption:  photoBanaras Khan / AFP/Getty Images : Pakistani earthquake survivors in Kashmir study earlier this month in a makeshift school established by the Jamaat-e-Islami party near India-Pakistan border.
