ISLAMABAD, Pakistan — Rattled by a powerful aftershock and later rumors of a big temblor in the offing, Pakistanis fled damaged homes and hospitals in the middle of the night and flooded out of multistory buildings in the capital at midday yesterday. The panic thwarted the rescue of a woman trapped in Muzaffarabad by last week's earthquake and later briefly paralyzed commerce in Islamabad's government district. Pakistan today called off the search for survivors of Saturday's magnitude 7.6 quake to concentrate on helping the millions left homeless. Maj. Farooq Nasir, an army spokesman, said the chances of finding any survivors in the rubble a week after the quake were "very slim." An expanded fleet of helicopters ferried tons of relief supplies to the north and evacuated hundreds more people in urgent need of medical care. But with winter closing in on the Himalayan region where as many as 40,000 are believed to have died in the tremor, officials said it was a race against time to help the injured, cold and hungry. Truck convoys bringing tents and other supplies to the mountainous heart of the disaster area were augmented by hundreds of private cars as Pakistanis thronged the quake-damaged road to Muzaffarabad to bring clothes, medicines and food to victims. Jan Egelund, the U.N. undersecretary for humanitarian relief, took an aerial tour of the Kashmir region. He appealed for more helicopters to speed the delivery of supplies to the remote highlands gripped by near-freezing nights and the season's first snow flurries. "Two million people are in need of new housing. They're facing extreme difficulty as it is just before winter. This is our worst nightmare," said Egelund, visibly moved by the magnitude of the disaster. Bemoaning a dearth of aircraft to evacuate the injured, he said "People are dying as we speak." Egelund praised the response of the Pakistani government and individuals who have contributed money, blankets, food and medicine to people in need. But he warned that the airlift of winter survival gear to the backward hinterlands would have to be stepped up at least threefold. About 30 helicopters have been deployed as aerial lifelines to the north, but more than 100 are needed, added Andrew MacCleod, operations director for the U.N. disaster-assistance team that accompanied Egelund on his tour. One of the latest suspected casualties of the massive quake was a 22-year-old woman trapped in a collapsed house in Muzaffarabad, about 80 miles north of the capital. Rescue workers said they had to break off efforts to reach her after a sharp 1:25 a.m. aftershock shifted the pile of debris where they were working. By the time efforts resumed six hours later in daylight, sniffer dogs indicated that she had died. The 5.6-magnitude aftershock caused chaos at the badly damaged main hospital in the city of Abbottabad, about 40 miles north of Islamabad. The facility had been receiving several hundred patients a day with serious injuries from Saturday's quake. Dozens of aftershocks, some surpassing magnitude 6, have kept Pakistanis on edge as have rumors of another coming tremor. The tremors have triggered slides and rock falls, blocking crude mountain roads and hampering aid efforts. In the hard-hit cities of Balakot, Bagh and Muzaffarabad, the homeless weathered the sharp overnight jolt in newly erected tents, some brought north in the trunks of private cars by Pakistanis carrying out spontaneous relief missions. While the hundreds of private cars slowed traffic on the only road from Islamabad and brought unwanted items, the influx of relief has helped get lifesaving necessities to some isolated people, said Pasnin Aslan of the U.N. Development Program office in Islamabad. "The whole nation mobilized on its own. There's been an immense amount of aid collected," she said. "The concern is more that we are still not able to reach all affected areas, particularly the mountain areas where assistance hasn't reached since the disaster." MacCleod, the U.N. operations director, said Pakistan's newly appointed relief coordinator was urging volunteers to call in to a government center to arrange a more orderly pickup of their donations. "It's commendable ... but this is a hindrance to the relief operations," said Amjad Jamal, of the World Food Program, which delivered 43 tons of high-energy biscuits yesterday to Muzaffarabad and the city of Mansehra. Without army protection, an individual with a truckload of food or medicine might prompt a riot, Jamal warned. "People are desperate. They're starving," he said. International aid workers continued to pour into the capital, gearing up for a massive relief effort that many people say is only just beginning. Feeding, sheltering and caring for the widely scattered survivors will be a long-term effort expected to last into next year. Material from The Associated Press is included in this reportCaption:  photoLefteris Pitarakis / The Associated Press : Pakistanis yesterday try to cross a suspension bridge, destroyed in last Saturday's earthquake, over the Nilam river to reach Nisar camp, on the outskirts of the northern Pakistani town of Muzaffarabad.
