MUZZAFARABAD, Pakistan — A week ago, the Ismail family, like other residents of the tidy complex in this city reserved for Pakistan state-radio employees, considered themselves middle-class, privileged people. They had solid incomes and solid homes in a region where thousands of rural people live in poverty. But now, their community has been transformed by a massive earthquake that struck Oct. 8 into an apocalyptic landscape of broken concrete and warped metal. Maj. Gen. Shaukat Sultan said today that the official death toll in Pakistan had risen to 38,000, up from the previous official toll of 25,000. One of the few items the Ismails were able to salvage from the wreckage of their house — a small black radio — has been forecasting frequent rain. Adding insult to injury, they have not even been able to get hold of a plastic tent to protect their children from the constant, cold drizzle that signals the fast-approaching Kashmiri winter. Every time relief trucks loaded with supplies pull up, there is a chaotic scramble, and the piles of tents vanish. "We're respectable people. We can't run after trucks like that," said Mohammed Ismail, 52, a retired noncommissioned army officer who works as a radio-station security guard. Ali Zuman Batt, 38, a neighbor who is also a security guard and retired army officer, said he had asked both the army and the fire department for a tent. To his surprise and dismay, both turned him away. But unlike many other homeless quake victims, these families were reluctant to blame the military for the lack of relief supplies, saying authorities had been preoccupied with removing the dead and rescuing the injured. "Had there not been an army, who would have been pulling out all these dead bodies?" Ismail said. "Civilians would not have been able to do that." Lack of shelter So the Ismails have been left to fend for themselves. Yesterday, after nearly a week of sleeping under a tree, they began trying to build a shed around it. Ismail's wife, Amber, 38, was too swollen and bruised to help much. She had been on the second floor of the house when it collapsed around her. But Mohammed and the couple's three children, plus two nieces and a nephew, all pitched in. They did not have much to work with. There was a large plastic sheet, barely thicker than cellophane, that relief workers had dropped by. There were some metal grates and twisted steel poles poking out of the enormous piles of rubble all around them. After about an hour of tugging and balancing and fastening, the family had erected a 4-foot tent that sagged precariously in the center. "I don't think this is going to keep us dry," said Amber, pointing to a rip in the plastic above her head. "But what else can we do?" So it went across northeastern Pakistan yesterday, as thousands of families continued to search for shelter six days after the powerful earthquake left an estimated 2 million people homeless. Focus on the living In Islamabad, the capital, a senior U.N. official said yesterday that search-and-rescue operations were over and that aid workers were now focused on helping those left alive. "It's a cruel reality," Jan Egeland, the U.N.'s top relief coordinator, told reporters. "But after a week, very few people survive." The magnitude of the challenge was evident all along the winding mountain road into Muzzafarabad, the capital of Pakistani-held Kashmir, which was largely flattened. Clusters of women and children squatted in fields beside the road amid piles of bedclothes and pillows. Several miles outside the city, a crowd of men surged around a gray van as volunteers tossed out blue tents. The supply was exhausted within seconds. "Once again, I've failed to get one of these," said Iftahar Hussein, 22, a laborer. "I've made so many attempts, but my family is still sleeping in the open." Meanwhile, dozens of Pakistani quake victims have lost limbs because of delays in getting the injured from isolated villages to a place with proper health care. Riffat Nazir's right leg was trapped under the door frame when last weekend's quake brought her family's house down in Kashmir. It took three days for her family to dig out their dead and give them a proper Muslim burial, and three more before they could transport the girl to a hospital near the Pakistani capital. By then, doctors had no choice but to amputate. At Rawalpindi General Hospital, where Riffat, 13, was recovering yesterday from the operation to amputate her right leg below the knee, surgeons have performed more than 200 major operations in the past six days, mostly on patients suffering crushed limbs. Rawalpindi's three main hospitals and three others in nearby Islamabad have been choked by the crisis. "The patients are coming late and suffering gangrene in their wounds," said Dr. Kamran Saeed, an orthopedic surgeon who had performed eight of the 25 or so amputations carried out at Rawalpindi General in recent days. "You cannot save the leg or arm. You have to save the life of the patient," he said. Injured people stranded in remote villages in the mountains of Kashmir and many outlying areas — where thousands have died — have seen no rescue workers. They often have had to rely on relatives carrying them for hours on foot to have a chance of survival. In the Siran Valley west of Balakot, Mercy Corps officials operating an emergency clinic report the first cases of severe diarrhea as well as gangrene. The clinic has seen about 150 patients a day for the past three days and has been bolstered by volunteer doctors from other parts of Pakistan who have come to assist the sick and wounded, according to Cassandra Nelson, a Mercy Corps spokeswoman in a phone interview yesterday from Pakistan. Tents remain in short supply, Nelson said, and even when tents are available, living conditions can be very dire. In one area measuring no more than 20 feet by 20 feet, Nelson said she saw refugee tents, two fresh graves, people relieving themselves and people cooking meals. "When you put all that together, you really have a problem." Compiled from reports by The Washington Post, The Associated Press and Seattle Times staff reporter Hal Bernton.Caption:  photoRichard Vogel / The Associated Press : Earthquake victim, Abdul Razak, 10, from Kashmir yesterday recovers from having his left arm amputated at the Rawalpindi General Hospital in Pakistan.
