Afghan quake kills 5 KABUL, Afghanistan — An earthquake today destroyed homes and killed five people near Afghanistan's eastern border with Pakistan, a Defense Ministry spokesman said. Army rescue teams were on their way to the remote area, said Gen. Mohammed Zahir Azimi. Pakistan's Seismological Center in the city of Peshawar said two quakes were registered along the border area early today. One was a magnitude-5.2 and hit just after midnight local time. The other, a magnitude-4.9 quake, struck at dawn. Aid copter crash in Azerbaijan kills 4 BAKU, Azerbaijan — A U.N. helicopter on a mission to help Pakistan earthquake victims crashed yesterday in western Azerbaijan, killing at least four crew members, officials said. The helicopter went down in the Goychay region, about 125 miles west of the Azerbaijani capital, Baku, killing all four people on board, said Nazim Ismaylov, the head of the regional administration. Ismaylov, speaking in a telephone interview from the crash site, couldn't immediately comment on the type of the helicopter and its owner but said he saw four charred bodies of the crew. Sabir Ilyasov, a deputy head of the national carrier Azerbaijani Airlines, said the helicopter was a Russian Ka-32 chartered by the United Nations for a relief mission in earthquake-stricken Pakistan. Ilyasov said the helicopter stopped to refuel in Azerbaijan's city of Gyanca on a flight from Turkey to Pakistan, and crashed shortly afterward. India, Pakistan plan border cooperation MUZAFFARABAD, Pakistan — In another sign of growing cooperation between South Asia's nuclear rivals, India and Pakistan yesterday proposed setting up aid camps along their disputed border in Kashmir, allowing earthquake victims to cross the frontier for medical treatment. India suggested setting up three camps in the quake-hit zone of Kashmir that would provide food, drinking water and tents to Pakistani victims. Pakistan made its own proposal hours later, suggesting five points along the disputed border for setting up aid camps and saying those visiting its portion of Kashmir would be allowed through if they had proper travel documents, the Press Trust of India news agency reported. Islamabad had reacted cautiously to New Dehli's announcement, saying the two sides would have to meet to discuss the proposal, which followed calls from Pakistan's president to open up the heavily militarized frontier for Kashmiris seeking relief. Pakistan and India have fought two wars over Kashmir since independence 58 years ago. Mules can reach remote villages ARRIALA, Pakistan — With roads still blocked by landslides two weeks after a catastrophic earthquake hit northern Pakistan and winter near, mules are one of the few ways to send emergency supplies to mountain villages. But like everything else after the disaster, they are in short supply after the Oct 8. earthquake in northern Pakistan. Yesterday a train of more than 40 mules set off from the village of Shaheed Ghali high above Muzaffarabad — the destroyed capital of Pakistani Kashmir — up steep, rocky tracks to settlements on ridges where helicopters cannot land. They were carrying enough food from the U.N. World Food Program (WFP) for 2,000 people for a week, but with hundreds of villages cut off, that remains a drop in the ocean. Ahead was an exhausting, dangerous trek of several hours on narrow paths, parts of which have fallen dizzyingly down the beautiful valley. Along the way, Reuters journalists saw several injured people being carried down the mountain on rope beds as well as a body borne in a funeral procession, mourners chanting verses from the Quran. WFP spokeswoman Mia Turner said the Pakistani army was bringing 50 more mules into the disaster zone and 48 were at work in the devastated Balakot area of adjoining North West Frontier Province. Each mule can carry 100 kg (220 pounds) of relief supplies up paths too narrow for vehicles. The WFP has been transporting as much as it can by road, but many have been blocked or swept away by landslides. Helicopters have been vital to the relief effort, but they too remain in short supply. Turner said two would be available soon for the WFP that could carry food in slings to mountain settlements where it was impossible to land. The mule train was organized by Jamaat ud Daawa, an Islamist aid group linked to the banned militant organization Lashkar-e-Taiba, which rented the animals from farmers. Jamaat, which opposes Indian rule on the other side of Kashmir as well as the U.S. military presence in neighboring Afghanistan, has been one of the most active aid groups in the quake relief effort. Compiled from The Associated Press and Reuters
