SRINAGAR, India — Tested in cold storage and wind tunnels, successfully used in the Kosovo crisis, a cheap shelter quickly assembled from local materials offers hope for some of the 2 million homeless facing a bitter winter in the wake of South Asia's earthquake, aid workers say. "It is not exactly central heating, but it will stop most of the cold," says Aditi Kapoor of the aid group Oxfam, describing a "thermal shelter" ready for replication in quake-ravaged regions of Indian- and Pakistani-controlled Kashmir. Measuring 12 by 12 feet, the semispherical tent is made of thick plastic laid over a frame of standard water pipes and lined with ordinary blankets. Mud is banked up around the shelter to prevent water from seeping inside and a simple drainpipe can be laid under it for sanitation. The shape offers less resistance to strong winds and allows snow to slide easily off the top, Kapoor said. Inside, extra warmth can come from a "bukhari," a simple, traditional stove, and a "kangri," the small coal burner that Kashmiris slip under their robes in winter. Both emit smoke but no flames. Compared with conditions under which most of the survivors now live, the shelter seems almost tropical. Their houses totally razed or too dangerously unhinged to live in, victims now spend nights huddled in uninsulated tents, lean-tos made of maize stalks or under the stars. "The cold is setting in very fast. It is critical to have an alternative shelter for people. It will save lives because it will save them from the cold," Kapoor said. Many of the shelters — Oxfam's or other versions that may materialize — will have to be supplied locally as aid officials say not enough winterized tents can be shipped in time from aid warehouses or private contractors worldwide. "Such initiatives have a huge advantage. We pick up material from the local market, and in three hours it's up," says Sarabjit Singh Sahota, an Indian architect who adapted the prototype for use on the Indian subcontinent. Oxfam is also working on the shelter project in Pakistan. Three people, or two strong men, can assemble the shelter, which costs at most $158. Oxfam is ready to provide funds for those who cannot afford to buy one, or victims can use some of the $900 the Indian government began giving out to homeless families. The shelter prototype was developed in 1999 by an England-based group, Shelter Project, which conducted tests in cold storage warehouses, car-factory wind tunnels, Britain's open fields and via computer modeling. Oxfam United Kingdom used the shelters in Kosovo and they were modified in India, where the aid group put up a model on the grounds of the Srinagar Youth Hostel and gave demonstrations to villagers, other aid agencies and the government, receiving what Kapoor says was a very positive response.Caption:  photoPaula Bronstein / Getty Images : A Pakistani man tries to keep warm yesterday sitting next to piles of clothing thrown from trucks onto the street for earthquake victims in Balakot, Pakistan-controlled Kashmir.
