Since Ramadan began early last week, Iqbal Abbasi has gone often to Idriss Mosque in the Northgate area for the special prayers that are said during this holiest of Islamic months. In the past few days, even more prayers are being said: for victims and survivors of the devastating Pakistan earthquake. And with the prayers and worries have come efforts to relieve the suffering. At the center of the mosque's fund raising is Abbasi, 56, of Everett, who grew up in a village that's been demolished and who still has loved ones in the area. "The main thing is to heal people through spiritual prayer or thoughts," said Abbasi, a director of the Islamic Center of Washington, which operates Idriss Mosque. "At the same time, what we need to do is to take care of the surviving families." Since Saturday's earthquake, local Pakistanis and Muslims — individually and in groups — have taken action, sending money, setting up bank accounts for donations, organizing fund-raising dinners, soliciting corporate and personal donations and arranging airlifts of medicine and other supplies. Starting today and continuing this weekend, many mosques in the area are expected to intensify efforts to gather donations. Community leaders acknowledge the challenge of raising money after the South Asian tsunami and Hurricane Katrina already tapped many wallets — and much of the community's fund-raising energy. "You look in your wallet and it's empty — the moths have even flown out," said Jeff Siddiqui, a local Pakistani American and Muslim, who donated to quake-relief efforts anyway. "Most people are drained." Still, much as they grieve over the fact that the earthquake happened during Ramadan, which marks the seventh-century revelation of the Quran to Mohammed, there is an unexpected benefit for fund raising. One of Islam's five pillars, which all Muslims are obliged to practice, is charity, and Muslims believe that if they give during the month of Ramadan, their heavenly rewards from God will be multiplied. "If this happened any other time except Ramadan, we might be seeing some of that [charity] burnout," said Aziz Junejo, a local Muslim community leader. Junejo, who is also a contributing religion columnist for The Seattle Times, is seeking out local companies to donate thermal and wool blankets, sleeping bags and tents that can withstand the extreme cold of the mountainous region most devastated by the quake. "Ramadan is the time when Muslims are the most generous people," he said. "They believe their rewards are multiplied seven to 700 times. This is a time for them to be more generous, more caring, to strive hard to do good." While Abbasi, with Idriss Mosque, waits for word on what the devastated villages need most, he is asking worshippers to donate money rather than supplies. He hopes to raise enough money to buy supplies for about eight villages between the cities of Abbottabad and Muzaffarabad, both near the quake's epicenter. Most of his family live in that area, and he's planning to fly there Oct. 22 to help survivors and check on relatives. He's talked with a cousin by phone and learned that while his closest relatives survived, three people on his wife's side of the family were killed, and some of his family members have been left homeless. "They live in a very remote area," he said. "They are so scared." The Islamic Center of Everett will begin collecting relief money tonight from those who come to pray, and will ask the larger community in Everett to bring in tents, blankets, folding beds and comforters that also will be sent to Pakistan. Amin Farooqui, a center board member, believes money may not buy the victims much in Pakistan since stores and other structures were destroyed. "There is literally nothing left for them to buy," he said. The Pakistan Association of Greater Seattle is coordinating many of the fund-raising and relief efforts. Its Web site, www.pakistanseattle.com, lists the various efforts and what's still needed. The association has also set up a quake-relief fund at US Bank branches in the Seattle area. In addition to organized fund raising, individual efforts are under way. Mumtaz Qureshi, 59, of Woodinville, who had about 100,000 rupee (about $2,200 in U.S. dollars) in a bank account in Pakistan, phoned his brother there to instruct him to use the money to help their relatives and Chimalia, the village where they grew up. Most of the houses are in shambles, he said, and the money has so far been spent on tents and food. Qureshi's relatives in the U.S. have raised an additional $3,500 to help relatives back home and Chimalia, 15 miles north of Abbottabad. He plans to open an account today into which donors can deposit money for quake survivors. He also plans to hold several fund raisers, including a dinner once Ramadan is over. The best way to help is to focus a large amount of money on one area, says Qureshi, a Boeing systems analyst. He chose his childhood village, figuring it would be overlooked by relief organizations. "We felt we could make a difference in Chimalia." Janet I. Tu: 206-464-2272 or jtu@seattletimes.com How to help Pakistan Association of Greater Seattle Donations to Pakistan Earthquake Relief Fund accepted at any US Bank branch in the Seattle area; www.pakistanseattle.com Mercy Corps www.mercycorps.org 800-852-2100 Earthquake Relief Fund, Department NR, P.O. Box 2669, Portland, OR 97208 World Vision www.worldvision.org 888-56-CHILD P.O. Box 70288, Tacoma, WA 98481 Islamic Center of Everett 818 W. Casino Road, Everett, WA 98204 Accepting tents, blankets, folding beds and comforters. Save the Children www.savethechildren.org 800-728-3843 54 Wilton Road, Westport, CT 06880 American Red Cross International Response Fund www.redcross.org 800-HELPNOW P.O. Box 37243, Washington, D.C. 20013 World Concern — South Asia Earthquake www.worldconcern.org 800-755-5022 19303 Fremont Ave. N., Seattle, WA 98133 800-755-5022 CARE USA www.careusa.org P.O. Box 1870, Merrifield, VA 22116-9646 800-521-CARE Northwest Medical Teams www.nwmedicalteams.org P.O. Box 10, Portland, OR 97207 800-959-4325 Interfaith dinner Religious and ethnic groups are organizing an interfaith fund-raising dinner for Nov. 13 at Redmond Marriott Town Center. Details are still being worked out. For more information: bringrelief@hotmail.com.Caption:  photoJohn Lok / The Seattle Times : Before picking up his daughter from preschool yesterday at the Islamic School of Seattle, Elias Ibrahim adds a blanket to a mound of donated supplies for victims of the Pakistan earthquake. Donated items included a wheelchair, sleeping bags and tents.
