Today's forecast: sunny skies, highs in the 70s — and a 1-in-10,000 chance that an earthquake will cause shaking severe enough to move heavy furniture. The quake forecast comes from a new U.S. Geological Survey Web site launched yesterday, providing the public for the first time with an up-to-date quake-probability map for all of California: pasadena.wr.usgs.gov/step. The map, which resembles the daily offerings from meteorologists, is based on the work of USGS seismologists in Pasadena, Calif., who have developed a model to predict the likelihood of strong ground shaking in California over a 24-hour period. The model, described in the current issue of the science journal Nature, combines two well-known laws of seismology with long-term predictions of quake risk. Because dozens of quakes occur each day, the model continuously updates the probability of shaking throughout the state. About one-third of the map is shaded blue, reflecting a one-in-a-million chance of a significant quake in the next 24 hours. The coastline ranges from turquoise to greenish teal, where odds are closer to 1-in-10,000. Parkfield, the Monterey County town hit by a 6.0 quake last fall, is the brightest yellow spot in the whole state, with its 1-in-1,000 chance of strong shaking. Because it feeds off information from previous events, the model is best at forecasting quakes that follow other quakes. That means it is ideally suited to predicting the intensity and location of aftershocks, said USGS seismologist Matt Gerstenberger, chief architect of the model. It also means the model can't be trusted to foretell the Big One, since large quakes are preceded by a foreshock only about half of the time, he said. "What most people want as an earthquake prediction; we still can't do that," Gerstenberger said. However, said UCLA seismologist David Jackson: "Maybe you've been putting off something like getting water and food in place and charging your flashlight batteries. You may say, 'There's only a 1-in-1,000 chance, so I won't bother.' If it's 1-in-10, maybe you'll say, 'Now's the time.' " Had the model been operational in June 1992, it would have forecast a roughly 1-in-100 chance of strong shaking in the 24 hours before the high desert town of Landers was hit by a magnitude 7.3 quake, according to the study. The model would have all but guaranteed a serious temblor in Big Bear, which was hit by a magnitude 6.3 aftershock three hours later.
