URI, India — Hours after Amina gave birth to a boy in Indian-administered Kashmir, the world around her collapsed. The weekend's massive earthquake brought her brick house tumbling down in the remote Jabla village, trapping the mother and child in an eerie, cold darkness. They were pulled out of the rubble after the boy's father Manzoor Ahmed Mir and others spent 18 hours digging with bare hands. Mir, 35, has now named his son "Zalzala," or earthquake in Urdu. "It's a blessing from Allah that they are alive. He brought the earthquake with him so I have named him Abid Zalzala," he said. "Both the mother and child are healthy," Indian army doctor Rahul Kodgule said at a makeshift hospital in Uri, where they were taken after their rescue. The two were being moved to a bigger army hospital in Srinagar. "I was not at home when the earthquake struck. When I returned, my house was in rubble. I could hear my wife's voice from below, calling out my name," he said. Mir ran around for help, collecting other villagers from houses scattered around the scenic mountain village. After 18 hours of digging, the two were pulled out and taken to the army camp at Uri, said Mir, recalling the cold night he spent digging for a glimpse of his wife and newborn son. Pakistan government faces tough test Saturday's earthquake could be a crucial test of the military-dominated government of Pakistani President Pervez Musharraf. Musharraf, who took power in a bloodless coup in 1999, has built his reputation as a man of competence, mobilizing resources of a well-trained military apparatus without debate and making fast decisions under conditions of stress. Now he faces a crisis of major proportions at a time when his leadership is coming under growing pressure from Islamists and democracy advocates. At his office in the mountainous city of Murree, coordinating relief efforts in the worst-affected areas of Kashmir, Brig. Iftikhar Ali Khan has spent the better part of the past two days taking calls on four separate phones on his desk, often with a phone pressed to each ear. He says he understands public frustration at the Army's inability to move faster, but he adds, "You have to understand that we have never seen such a thing before. Most of the soldiers in my area were deployed on the front lines." Sumatra to get warning system A team of German and Indonesian scientists will set sail today for Sumatra island to install a tsunami warning system in the region worst hit by last year's Asian killer wave. The system of sensors on the ocean floor and giant buoys on its surface will be able to notify coastal observation stations within 10 minutes of a tsunami-strength earthquake. The system transmits information about earthquake activity to the stations via satellite. They will then automatically alert local media and residents via mobile phone text message, e-mail and fax, said Idwan Suhardi, a scientist from Indonesia's ministry of research and technology. It will be operational in Sumatra by the end of the year. Compiled from The Associated Press, Reuters and The Christian Science MonitorCaption:  photoB.K. Bangash / The Associated Press : A Kashmiri man makes his way through a fallen minaret of a mosque that collapsed Saturday in Muzaffarabad.Ajit Kumar / Associated Press : Abid Zalzala, 3 days old, sleeps in his father Mansur Ahmed's lap after being rescued from home's rubble.
