"Looking Like the Enemy: My Story of Imprisonment in Japanese-American Internment Camps" by Mary Matsuda Gruenewald (NewSage Press, $13.95). The Seattle author, who grew up on Vashon Island, recalls her family's experience of being forced into internment camps following the bombing of Pearl Harbor on Dec. 7, 1941. Gruenewald will read at 4:30 p.m. today at the Elliott Bay Book Co. (206-624-6600 or www.elliottbaybook.com). "Incapacity" by Jeanne Heuving (Chiasmus, $12, www.chiasmuspress.com). Classified by its publisher as poetry/fiction/autobiography/biography, this experimental work investigates "being and sex, excitement and inscription." Heuving is an associate professor at the University of Washington's Interdisciplinary Arts and Sciences program. "The Forest Service and the Greatest Good: A Centennial History" by James G. Lewis (Forest History Society, $29.95 hardcover, $19.95 paperback). A survey of the Forest Service's century-long, often embattled stewardship of wildlands for both preservation and recreational purposes. Washington's national forests form a key part of the picture. "Anne Gould Hauberg: Fired by Beauty" by Barbara Johns (University of Washington Press, $40). An opulent coffee-table book, chronicling the career of a key figure in Seattle's cultural life, most notably in her support of the Pilchuck Glass School. Hauberg also helped found the Pilot School for Neurologically Impaired Children, now the Experimental Education Unit at the U.W. Author Johns is former chief curator at the Tacoma Art Museum and former executive director of the Pilchuck Glass School. "McCartney" by Christopher Sandford (Carroll & Graf, $26.95). The Seattle rock biographer ("Kurt Cobain") takes on a Beatle. "Saving Cascadia" by John J. Nance (Pocket Star, $7.99). New in paperback: The Tacoma author, who usually specializes in air-disaster fiction, writes a locally set seismic-catastrophe epic. "What About Me? 12 Ways to Get Your Parents' Attention (Without Hitting Your Sister)" by Eileen Kennedy-Moore, illustrated by Mits Katayama (Parenting Press, $14.95). A picturebook for children ages 3 to 8, offering tips on constructive ways they can connect with their parents. Illustrator Katayama lives in Seattle. Michael Upchurch, Seattle Times book critic
