MUZAFFARABAD, Pakistan — Cold winds sweep through tents, where rains soak the ground and children cough. Days are passed by waiting in lines for meals, feeding babies or perhaps taking a few swings with a cricket bat. Three months after an earthquake in Kashmir, thousands of survivors are eking out an existence in tent camps, waiting out the harsh winter before returning to what remains of their mountain homes. Muhammad Arshad Mughal, 22, lives with six relatives in a white 7-by-10-foot tent — the size of a bathroom in their wrecked three-story family home — at a tent village in Muzaffarabad, the regional capital. When the quake struck Oct. 8, they were in their home village of Moji in the Leepa Valley. Mughal's first thought: It was shelling from the nearby Line of Control that divides Pakistan- and India-administered Kashmir. But when the family saw landslides, they knew they were wrong. Mughal and his family were outside and escaped injury. His sister Shameem Bibi, 18, was out for water and survived, but her husband and 4-month-old baby died in the rubble of their home — two among some 87,000 people killed by the quake. Altogether, Mughal lost 10 close relatives. He walked for four days to reach Muzaffarabad with two children on his back, begging for food on the way. Food, warmth scarce The sun struggles to rise above the jagged Himalayan foothills that frame the city of Muzaffarabad. A fierce wind rips across the tent village, whipping the clear plastic tarp covering Mughal's tent and rousing him and the others from their uneasy slumber after another cold night. Miriam, born after the quake and just 49 days old, starts crying before her mother Saleema Bibi, 18, takes her under her black scarf to be breast-fed. The family has used its sole can of baby formula, and has no money for more. Miriam was born in the hospital run by the International Committee of the Red Cross in a half-built cricket stadium. She spent a month under doctors' care after catching pneumonia, and was discharged again two weeks ago. The infant is the only family member to get breakfast. Her sister Irishba, 2, cries for tea, but there's no money to buy milk to soften the taste as the children prefer. "What can I do for you? Tell me," Saleema coaxes her daughter. At 7:32 a.m., the first helicopter aid flight of the day thunders overhead, one of many whose thumping punctuates the typical camp sounds: the cries of children, hushed tent conversations, chickens crowing. The ground is now mostly dry, but rains after New Year's sent water seeping in from all sides of the tent and kept the family awake all night, said Saleema. "No matter what comes inside, we have to live here," she says. "It is too difficult for us to anywhere else." Waiting for summer Saleema takes a bag of clothes to a cement slab at the camp where women gather to do laundry next to a garbage-filled dirt canal. With her eldest daughter Salma, 3, she sets to work scrubbing. The family had their luggage loaded onto a jeep bound for Islamabad when the quake hit, but all their belongings were stolen when they went back to check their house. They came here with nothing but the clothes on their back. All they have now — a few pots and pans, a gas-powered stove, a water cooler — were handouts from relatives. It's time for lunch, so Muhammad Ashfaq, 14, Mughal's brother, heads to the communal kitchen where cooks prepare food in black cauldrons over open fires. Young women are banned from collecting food, because camp administrators say they demand larger portions. The midday meal is a few scoops of rice for each family, and a richly scented stew. There appears to be some meat, but the teenager only gets six potato slices for the seven hungry mouths back at the tent. The family digs in with their bare hands. Afterward, Mughal prepares for midday prayers and performs ritual ablutions behind his tent, washing his hands and face. The competing smells of human excrement, spoiled food and animals are carried by the wind. Mughal heads to the site of a nearby tent mosque that on Saturday was felled by the wind into a tangle of tarps and fallen supports. He stands alone in the open on the straw mats and faces Mecca, children playing and cars driving by. He kneels and touches his forehead to the ground. Night falls quickly as the sun dips behind the hills at 4:30 p.m. and the biting winds rake across the tents. The family collects their evening meal of lentils and rice, and Miriam cries to be fed. Mughal says he will stay in this tent village until April when administrators plan to close it, and the family will move to a planned camp closer to their former home. Rebuilding will begin in summer. Saleema expresses confidence her three daughters will grow up in better conditions, and eventually work as doctors or become top government officials. Before getting ready for bed, Mughal sits under the yellow glow of a bare light bulb to write a letter to his father and mother, ages 70 and 60, who he left in the care of neighbors back in the village. He has sent two letters, but there has been no reply. "What is the reason, are you all right?" Mughal writes in the flowing Urdu script. "I pray to Allah for your long life and health. I am OK. God bless you."Caption:  photo, mapAnjum Naveed / The Associated Press : Kashmiri Muhammad Arshad Mughal, 22, who survived the Oct. 8 earthquake, holds his 2-year-old daughter, Irishba Mughal, as they sit in the sun outside his tent near Muzaffarabad.The Seattle Times: Winter begins to bite Kashmir (GRJ10O34P)
