PANGANDARAN, Indonesia — The blare of ambulance sirens triggered rumors of a new tsunami Wednesday, prompting hundreds of jittery Pangandaran residents to panic and flee to higher ground. Searchers continued to pull bodies from the rubble in the coastal resort on Java as survivors returned to the remnants of their homes to see what they could salvage. At least 531 people died in Monday's devastating wave and about 275 people remained missing, authorities said. Some may have been pulled out to sea when the 6-foot wave receded. A 6.2 earthquake struck off the coast of Java on Wednesday afternoon, causing high-rise buildings to sway again in the capital, Jakarta, as they did during Monday's 7.7-magnitude offshore quake. However, there were no reports of another giant wave striking land. In Pangandaran, a resort town about 170 miles southeast of Jakarta, thousands of people took refuge in temporary camps inland, including 1,100 at an elementary school. Monday's tsunami struck 1-1/2 years after a much larger tsunami, which also originated in the Indian Ocean, struck a dozen countries and killed at least 216,000 people, more than half on the northern tip of Indonesia's island of Sumatra. Indonesia received billions of dollars in international aid after the 2004 tsunami but has yet to set up a promised national tsunami-warning system that might have alerted Pangandaran residents. Without a warning system, residents must decide when to head for the hills. On Wednesday, that's what hundreds of residents did when ambulance sirens sounded and someone began shouting that a tsunami was coming. "I heard people screaming 'water ... water!' and everyone was running away from the beach," said Liah, 28, who ran carrying her baby. "I was so scared," said Liah, who like many Indonesians goes by one name. Police officers drove along the road trying to calm the mob, to no avail. "The rumor was triggered by those cars that put on their sirens, like a firetruck and ambulance," said Hermanto, the local police chief. "It's easy to panic people in a situation like this. We checked ... The waves were just regular waves." Jouhana reported from Pangandaran and Paddock from Singapore.
