MUZAFFARABAD, Pakistan — The season's heaviest rain and snow lashed Pakistan's earthquake-hit areas Sunday, grounding helicopter-aid flights and deepening the misery of survivors who huddled around campfires to keep warm. Aid workers have warned that cold weather in the Himalayan foothills, where temperatures have fallen below freezing, may claim more lives after the magnitude-7.6 quake Oct. 8 left about 87,000 dead and 3.5 million homeless. Poor visibility forced a suspension of flights by helicopters from the U.N., foreign military units and Pakistan's army, which have been delivering winterized tents, clothes, food and other provisions to survivors, said an air force officer at Chaklala air base, near the capital, Islamabad. The weather was likely to clear enough for flights to resume by late today, he said on condition of anonymity. The United Nations estimates that 2.5 million people are living in tents below 5,000 feet and up to 400,000 are in higher areas where it is feared that snow and rain will make it harder to reach them. Cold rain pelted the quake zone throughout Sunday, and about 12 inches of snow fell above the 6,000-foot level, said Qamar-uz Zaman Chaudhry, head of Pakistan's Meteorological Department. On Sunday evening, heavy snow also blanketed Muzaffarabad, the capital of Pakistan's portion of Kashmir and the supply center for the humanitarian operation. Residents reported that roads leading to the higher mountains were blocked by vehicles stuck in snow. Chaudhry said more snow and rain were likely over the next two days. As the cold chilled sprawling tent cities that have sprung up in Pakistan's northwest and in Kashmir, survivors struggled to keep warm around campfires and candles — exposing them to yet another danger. Police said three young sisters died Saturday when a tent caught fire in Gul Deri, a village in the northwest. A candle started a blaze inside a tent that the family had pitched next to their home, which was destroyed by the quake, police official Samar Khan said. In Muzaffarabad and nearby areas, survivors said the rain and snow were making their lives miserable. At a camp in Muzaffarabad, Sajjad Ali Shah, 38, said people had dug drains around their tents to keep out water, but the ground had become soaked. "We wrap our children in blankets, but it is very cold," he said.Caption:  photoTomas Munita / The Associated Press : A man tries to fix his tent Sunday in the Jhelum Valley of Pakistan. The tent, with the man's family inside, collapsed Saturday night during snowfall.
