YOGYAKARTA, Indonesia — Rescue workers and military and police units scoured this ravaged historic city in central Java through the night, using searchlights to find survivors of the 6.3-magnitude earthquake that struck early Saturday, leveling homes, hotels and bridges. Residents dug mass graves to bury the bodies lining the streets. The death toll had risen to 3,733, according to government officials. Aftershocks repeatedly rattled the area, about 250 miles east of the capital, Jakarta, as the injured were taken to hospitals over cracked roads on flatbed trucks, vans, buses and even motorbikes. But many were blocked by broken bridges. The earthquake triggered increased activity at a nearby volcano, Mount Merapi, which shot hot gas clouds and volcanic rocks down its western slopes soon after the earthquake. Many residents first thought the earthquake was the long-expected eruption. A driving rain began late Saturday night, and major hospitals set up tents in their parking lots to try to protect the overflowing masses of the injured. At one hospital, many victims lay on the wet ground with only newspaper beneath them. Nurses ran in and out, ferrying quickly dwindling supplies. The city, with a densely packed population of 500,000, is the cultural center of Java and is a popular tourist destination in Indonesia. One of the main hotel districts was badly damaged, but there were few reports of fatalities there. Officials said that, at the least, tens of thousands of residents had been left homeless. Survivors camped outside their houses or what was left of them, or in the many rice fields in the area, huddling in the rain around small fires. Electricity remained out in much of the southern half of the city. In Bantul, about 20 miles south of Yogyakarta, Mayor Idham Samawi said rescuers had counted 2,200 dead and many more people were alive but trapped under thousands of collapsed buildings. The epicenter of the earthquake, which struck just before 6 a.m., was about 15 miles south of Yogyakarta at the southern coast of Java on the Indian Ocean, and about six miles below the surface. Fearing a tsunami, many residents fled for higher ground, but the ocean brought no further destruction. An even stronger quake measuring 6.7 in magnitude rocked the South Pacific island nation of Tonga today, the U.S. Geological Survey said. And the New Britain region of Papua New Guinea was shaken by a 6.2-magnitude quake, the USGS reported. It was unclear whether the tremors had caused any casualties or damage. Saturday's temblor was the third major quake to strike Indonesia in 17 months. On Dec. 26, 2004, a magnitude-9 quake struck off the northern coast of Sumatra island, triggering a tsunami that wiped out half the city of Banda Aceh. The following March, a magnitude-8.7 offshore quake shook the neighboring island of Nias, killing more than 600. Rescue efforts got under way quickly Saturday, with some emergency workers already stationed in Yogyakarta (pronounced JOG-jakarta), and evacuation points already designated because Mount Merapi has been showing signs of impending eruption for months. Indonesia has the largest number of active volcanoes in the world. Subandriyo, the director of the Merapi division of Yogyakarta's Volcanology Center, who goes by one name, said he expected activity at Mount Merapi to increase as shockwaves continued to disturb the mountain. If the large lava dome that has been forming for months is dislodged, he said, a serious eruption could follow. President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono ordered the army to help evacuate victims, and he arrived Saturday in the province with a team of Cabinet ministers. He slept in a tent camp with survivors. Some international relief agencies also managed to get to Yogyakarta quickly to ease the burden of local hospitals, and to augment search-and-rescue operations. The earthquake cracked the runway at the airport in Yogyakarta, forcing it to be closed, but it was not clear how that would affect relief efforts. Expressions of shock and condolence, paired with pledges of aid, began to flow into Indonesia. Malaysia said it would send a 56-member search team, doctors and medical supplies, and the European Commission said it would release up to $3.8 million in emergency aid. In Washington, President Bush offered condolences while the United States provided an emergency allocation of $500,000 for assistance to victims. The need for aid was escalating rapidly. A doctor with the Indonesian Red Cross volunteering at the hospital in Bantul said all the hospitals in the area were teeming with victims and the situation was becoming desperate. Thousands of residents, mostly women and children, huddled at the evacuation points. Some said they lacked food and water. In the parking lot of a hospital in Bantul, Pardio, 34, a rice farmer, lay on newspapers among hundreds of wounded villagers, many of them moaning and clutching their heads and legs. Intravenous drips hung from trees and trash cans. Pardio had been asleep in a bed with his wife and two daughters when the earth began to rumble. He leapt up and grabbed his 6-year-old, Putri, while his wife, Sri Nissi, clutched 13-month-old Uli. "I can't recall exactly what happened next, but I remember my daughter falling from my arms, because I remember I heard a sound — braaak!" Pardio said. The next thing he knew, Putri was under rubble. A wall crashed on him, and his wife and Uli tumbled on his back. Then he fell unconscious. Pardio, who sustained injuries to his head, chest and arm, came to at a hospital but did not see his family. Eventually, a stranger gave him a ride back to his neighborhood. His home, along with the houses of virtually everyone else, was a mess of corrugated-tin roofing and timber. Finally, he found his wife and Uli wandering around. Soldiers, serving as rescue workers, took the three of them to Panembahan Senopati Hospital in Bantul. Pardio recalled how his daughter had been so full of energy, his eyes tearing. Pardio's brother, Suparman, buried Putri behind Pardio's house Saturday afternoon. Twenty-nine other bodies were buried in the neighborhood, he said. Suparman dressed Putri in the traditional Muslim white shroud, but there was no time for a proper ritual cleansing. Before he buried her, he removed Putri's tiny gold earrings, ring and necklace, which were supposed to be saved to pay for her education. He put them in a plastic envelope in his pocket. Pardio began to cry as he recalled how he had reprimanded his high-spirited daughter a day earlier. "She was just being a little naughty, and it's hard to tell her to behave," he said. "But now I'm feeling very sorry." Pardio said he would forever remember his daughter's last words: "Daddy, I know I'm a bit naughty, but I promise I won't do anything naughty tomorrow." Compiled from The New York Times, The Washington Post, The Associated Press, Reuters and Los Angeles Times.Caption:  photo, mapVillagers Mourn Earthquake Victims In Bantul, Indonesia, On Saturday. Adek Berry / AFP / Getty Images :Jewel Samad / AFP / Getty Images : A family tries to salvage belongings from their destroyed house in Yogyakarta, Indonesia, after Saturday's earthquake. The death toll was expected to rise as victims lay dead or injured, trapped in the wreckage of their homes.The Associated Press: Strong earthquake rocks Java (G30120VK3)Tarko Surdiano / AFP / Getty Images : Rescuers help an injured woman from a truck to a hospital in Yogyakarta.Adek Berry / AFP / Getty Images : Villagers carry an earthquake victim during a funeral in Bantul, Indonesia, on Saturday.
