Recent seismic trenching at the future Brightwater sewage-plant site in Snohomish County shows no danger to chemical-storage tanks or plant buildings, say King County officials. But a U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) team, which also inspected the trenches, questions whether such a claim can be made without more study. King County says buildings holding chemicals that would be near the middle of the 114-acre site, just north of Woodinville, can stay where designed because trenching there shows no active faulting underneath. Based on a construction agreement with Snohomish County, King County would redesign the project if trenching showed potentially active faults near chemical buildings and wastewater storage tanks. Seismic concerns were raised in 2004, when a USGS trench at the northern end of the property highlighted an active fault, presumed to be connected to the long-stretching and potentially dangerous South Whidbey Island fault zone. Residents living near the sewage plant's footprint have since tried to stop the project's because of those seismic concerns. They fear an earthquake could damage buildings and send chemicals or raw sewage into a drinking-water aquifer that runs under the Brightwater property. King County dug the new trenches about four weeks ago beneath where those buildings are planned. Early reports say disturbed geological layers appear connected more to glacial movements about 16,000 years old than to seismic activity. Though some evidence of seismic disturbance was noted, it appeared older than the glacial activity, indicating a dead fault. Jeff Keaton, an engineering geologist hired by King County, is preparing a written report that will be available next month. Keaton said there is no reason for alarm. Even if land movements there were linked to tectonic faulting, "the evidence leads me to believe it hasn't happened in about 16,000 years," Keaton said recently. Seismic activity less than 10,000 years old can be considered potentially active. USGS officials, given a chance about two weeks ago to inspect the trenches, say much more work is needed to be so confident. The USGS team shared a one-page report with King County that questions Keaton's findings. "Although it may be possible to develop a defensible argument that all of the deformation is related to glacio-tectonics [glacial movement], an equally convincing argument could be constructed for some or all of the observed deformation resulting from regional seismotectonics [seismic activity]," wrote Craig Weaver, a USGS seismologist. "With the available field information, it would appear to be very tough to develop a strong argument for the timing of the cracks." The USGS isn't discounting Keaton's assessment, Weaver said by telephone last week. The USGS just believes there could be other reasons that account for ground slippage noticed in the crack. Specific tests that could date the ground movements were not completed — another missing link in the study, Weaver said. Still, Brightwater project manager Christie True said the project can still be constructed as designed, even if the evidence is debatable. King County will follow building codes that must account for a possible earthquake. Facilities should be able to withstand ground shaking if built correctly. That doesn't appease neighboring residents or the Sno-King Environmental Alliance, a community activist group that has sued to stop plant construction because of earthquake concerns. "Based on the USGS report, we don't believe King County has the information they need to make their assumptions," said alliance spokeswoman Emma Dixon. "We already have evidence of active faulting on the site, and that would underscore the further need to trench the entire site, not just one area." An undiscovered fault line could still be potentially hazardous, Dixon said. Traveling with the USGS to study the trenches was Tim Walsh, the geological-hazards program manager for the state Department of Natural Resources. But Walsh wasn't allowed to take part because the people running the site that day said he hadn't been invited and that they couldn't confirm his identity, even though USGS people vouched for him. "I'm trying to put together a seismic-hazard map for the state, so I'm disappointed," Walsh said. "With a trench only open a short time, you need as many people looking in as you can for peer review." True said those in charge at the site did not know who Walsh was and that other people had falsely identified themselves in the past to gain access to the property. Christopher Schwarzen: 425-783-0577 or cschwarzen@seattletimes.comCaption:  mapThe Seattle Times : Brightwater plant site (GN912RRLB)
