YOGYAKARTA, Indonesia — A powerful earthquake rocked Indonesia's Central Java province early today, killing more than 400 people, injuring scores, and flattening buildings. The magnitude 6.2 quake struck at 5:54 a.m. near the city of Yogyakarta, 250 miles east of the capital, Jakarta. It hit as many people slept, causing death and damage there and in at least two other nearby towns, officials said. The Indonesian Red Cross put the death toll at 443 and said more than 2,800 people were injured, many from collapsed homes and buildings. In the chaos that followed the quake, rumors of an impending tsunami sent thousands of people on Java fleeing to higher ground in cars and motorbikes. But Japan's Meteorological Agency said there was no danger of a tsunami. Yogyakarta, on the island of Java, is around 18 miles from the sea. A magnitude 9.1 earthquake on Dec. 26, 2004, under the sea off the coast of Indonesia's Sumatra Island triggered a tsunami that killed more than 131,000 people in nearby Aceh province, and more than 100,000 others in nearly a dozen other countries. Indonesia, the world's largest archipelago, is prone to seismic upheaval due to its location on the so-called Pacific "Ring of Fire," an arc of volcanoes and fault lines encircling the Pacific Basin. The quake also triggered heightened activity in nearby Mount Merapi volcano, which has been spewing clouds of hot ash, gas and lava for several weeks, a scientist said. One eruption soon after the earthquake sent debris some 2 miles down its western flank, said a vulcanologist monitoring the peak. The death toll was expected to climb, morgue officials told The Associated Press and the privately run el-Shinta radio said there were at least 393 bodies in nine hospitals in the region. TV footage showed damaged hotels and government buildings, and several collapsed buildings. The quake cracked the runway in Yogyakarta's airport, closing it to aircraft until at least Sunday, Transport Minister Hatta Radjasa said. Electricity and communications were also down in parts of the city, police said. Yogyakarta's royal palaces and the nearby Borobudur temple complex are prime attractions for domestic and foreign tourists.
