To build or not to build  An independent firm is studying King County's report to determine if building permits will be issued. Building permits for the proposed Brightwater sewage-treatment plant hinge on Snohomish County's review of the latest seismic report submitted last week by King County. For Snohomish County to consider the project, expected to be built at the intersection of Highways 522 and 9 north of Woodinville, King County was required to study the potential for active faults on the 114-acre site, especially near the location of sensitive chemical-storage buildings. King County trenched the location twice this summer, and says in its latest report there are no signs of active faulting — only glacial movement of soils. Residents opposed to the sewage plant's location have said they're most concerned about an earthquake disrupting the $1.75 billion plant's operations, sending raw sewage or chemicals into a drinking-water aquifer running beneath the property. A grassroots group called the Sno-King Environmental Alliance bases its arguments on U.S. Geological Survey evidence that suggests strands of the south Whidbey Island fault zone run through the property. Snohomish County officials say they've hired an independent geotechnical firm to study King County's report and expect to make a preliminary determination on building permits within three weeks. King County officials say they must have the permits in hand by February in order to have the plant constructed and operational by an internal deadline of 2010. "Snohomish County has to do its due diligence, and we're aware they've hired very qualified experts," said Christie True, the Brightwater project manager. "But we've found no faults beneath where those buildings will be located." Snohomish County will assess the science and methodology behind the trenching results, how the results might impact on-site construction and whether all of this fits into a construction agreement signed last fall between the two counties, said Craig Ladiser, Snohomish County's planning director. Outlined in the agreement is the process for Snohomish County to use in determining whether King County can proceed with plant construction. In return, Snohomish County will receive $67 million in mitigation money. The first payment of $33.5 million is expected next month. An additional $17.5 million will be paid next year if building permits are issued, and a final $16 million in 2008. Snohomish County officials say they'll use the money to build parks, make surface-water improvements and construct sidewalks and other road improvements near the Brightwater site. First on the list is the purchase of land for the parks, said Steve Thomsen, the county's public-works director. "With changing prices and availability, land purchases have to be first," he said. "We're evaluating sites now, but we've not begun any negotiations." The county hopes to construct a 30- to 40-acre park within four miles of the Brightwater site, Thomsen said. Meanwhile, King County continues to build tunneling needed to send raw sewage to the plant and treated sewage to a discharge site in Puget Sound. Those construction permits were issued earlier. Christopher Schwarzen: 425-783-0577 or cschwarzen@seattletimes.comCaption:  mapThe Seattle Times : Waiting for building permits (GC614M0GC)
