TAIPEI, Taiwan — With one blow, Mother Nature triggered the largest telecommunications outage in years, cutting off or slowing telephone and Internet traffic in Asia from Beijing to Bangkok. A powerful earthquake off the southern tip of Taiwan late Tuesday damaged up to a dozen fiber-optic cables that cross the ocean floor south of Taiwan. They carry traffic between China, Japan, South Korea, Southeast Asia, the U.S. and Taiwan itself. The magnitude-6.7 tremor, which struck near the town of Hengchun, killed two people and injured more than 40. It also showed the vulnerability of the global telecommunications network. Chunghwa Telecom, Taiwan's largest phone company, said the quake damaged several of the undersea fiber lines, and repairs could take two to three weeks. Taiwan lost almost all of its telephone capacity to Japan and mainland China. Service to the United States also was hard hit, with 60 percent of capacity lost. Later, Chunghwa said connections to the U.S., China and Canada were mostly restored, but 70 percent of the capacity to Japan was still down, along with 90 percent of the capacity to Southeast Asia. Stephan Beckert, an analyst with the Washington, D.C.-based research firm TeleGeography, said it was the largest telecommunications failure in years. "The magnitude of the break is surprising, because Taiwan is otherwise a very well-connected system," Beckert said. He noted that cables get cut and disrupted all the time, but that there's usually enough backup capacity on other lines to keep traffic flowing without interruption. Net around Pacific But with multiple cables broken at once, Internet traffic around the Pacific was upset. Hong Kong telephone company PCCW, which also provides Internet service, said the quake cut its data capacity in half. Internet access was cut or severely slowed in Beijing, said an official from China Netcom, that country's second-biggest phone company. The official, who would not give his name, said the cause was thought to be the earthquake, but he had no further details. The Internet Traffic Report Web site, which monitors Internet connectivity in several countries, showed that packet loss, or the percentage of data that doesn't reach its destination, spiked sharply in Asia at the time of the earthquake, rising from about 10 percent to more than 40 percent. On Wednesday afternoon U.S. time, the Web site showed limited connectivity to China, Singapore and Indonesia, while Japan and Taiwan were apparently back to normal. KDDI, Japan's major carrier for international calls, said its fixed-line telephone service was affected by the quake. Spokesman Haruhiko Maeda said customers were having trouble calling India and the Middle East, which usually use the cables near Taiwan. Maeda said the company was rerouting calls through the U.S. and Europe. South Korea's largest telecom company, KT, said that the lines it uses were damaged, affecting dozens of companies and institutions, including South Korea's Foreign Ministry. In the U.S., Seattle-based Starbucks, which has more than 1,600 stores in the Asia-Pacific region, said the disruptions didn't affect its communication with the outlets. Cisco Systems' Linksys division warned that customer-support call centers for its home-networking gear were affected, but other companies with overseas call centers reported few problems. Molly Faust, a spokeswoman for New York-based American Express, said the company "wasn't experiencing any customer-service issues in Asia." She said that there were "some interruptions" of the company's computer systems in Taiwan, but added: "It didn't impact customers because we could use backup systems and manual processes." Tyco International said it has a Taiwan-based cable-laying ship heading to the area for repairs. "Pretty much everything south of Taiwan has been reported at fault," said Frank Cuccio, vice president of marine services at Morristown, N.J.-based Tyco Telecommunications. Cuccio expects the ship to arrive in a few days. It then takes three to five days to repair each cable, but mudslides set off by the earthquake can complicate matters by covering the cables, making them harder to retrieve. 10,800 feet deep Cuccio said the ruptures are more than 10,800 feet below sea level, too deep for the remote-controlled submersibles that otherwise would find the cables. Instead, the ship will drag grapnels along the bottom to find them. The cables on the deep ocean floor are just two-thirds of an inch, a testament both to the immense data capacity of optical fiber and the fragility of the links that form the global telecommunications network. Peter Svensson reported from New York. Associated Press reporter Eileen Alt Powell also contributed to this report. Information on Starbucks provided by Seattle Times business staff.Caption:  photoMaurice Tsai / Bloomberg News : Taiwan's Chunghwa Telecom, said the damage to underseas fiber-optic cables could take two to three weeks to repair.
