Snohomish County has approved a seismic report submitted by King County as part of its building-permit application at the Brightwater sewage-plant site. The approval means Snohomish County agrees with King County that no active earthquake faults exist beneath the proposed location of two chemical-storage buildings. For months, opponents of the $1.75 billion sewage plant being built at the junction of highways 9 and 522 just north of Woodinville have argued there is evidence of faulting, possibly connected to the south Whidbey Island fault zone. They fear an earthquake could send raw sewage into a drinking-water aquifer beneath the property. King County trenched the area near where the chemical-storage buildings will be located twice this summer, then prepared a report that it sent to Snohomish County for consideration. With the seismic approval behind it, Snohomish County will now focus on the remainder of the building-permit application. King County officials have said that they need the permits by spring so that construction of the plant can be finished in time for a 2010 start date. Snohomish County recently received $33.5 million from King County as a mitigation payment and expects two more payments — $17.5 million in 2007 and $16 million in 2008. Lynnwood Funds sought to save mobile-home parks State and Snohomish County officials are working together to save two adjacent mobile-home parks in Lynnwood that otherwise will be redeveloped into single-family homes. The parks are home to approximately 90 residences, many of which are those of seniors and disabled individuals living on low or fixed incomes. The Washington state Department of Community, Trade and Economic Development will provide $3.5 million in federal funds to help the county purchase the properties — The Squire and Kingsbury — from the owner. The county must contribute $2.5 million by June 30. The remainder of the funding needed — about $3 million — will come from bonds issued by the Snohomish County Housing Authority. According to state officials, approximately 21 mobile-home parks statewide are scheduled for closure by next fall, potentially displacing 626 families. More than half of the affected residents live in Snohomish County. Lynnwood Families, police go on shopping spree Lynnwood police officers were to undertake their first "Shop With A Cop" trip this afternoon, accompanying 12 needy families on a combined $2,200 holiday-shopping spree at the Lynnwood Target store. Twelve mothers and their 30 children, all clients of the YMCA's Pathways For Women housing program, were scheduled to participate. The women will be given cash to buy their children's gifts, and the officers will accompany the children as they shop for presents for their mothers. Retired school cook Sue Emme, of Lynnwood, donated $1,800 toward the shopping trip, using proceeds from her annual garage sale. In past years she has donated her garage-sale revenues to buying winter gloves and hats for needy children, supporting a Christmas program for Lynnwood Elementary, buying 120 new children's books, helping the family of a child with cancer and contributing to the cost of a child's artificial ear. Target also is supporting the shopping trip with a cash donation to the program, plus special discounts for the 12 families. Edmonds City, county to buy part of school site Snohomish County is contributing $1.2 million to help Edmonds buy 5.5 acres of the former Woodway Elementary School property for a wooded park with baseball and soccer fields and a children's play area. The $3.2 million sale will save half of the 11-acre site from development. Burnstead Construction, a Bellevue developer, purchased the rest of the property with plans to build high-end homes. The city's portion of the site, at 23700 104th Ave. W., includes several old school buildings that will be razed. The county in 1999 invested $5,000 in baseball improvements on the school site, which serves youth-sports groups throughout the area. Marysville Names chosen for new schools The Marysville School Board voted unanimously last week to name its new high school Marysville Getchell High School. The school is being built on Getchell Hill in the eastern part of the school district near Highway 9 and is expected to open in 2011. The School Board also accepted a naming committee's recommendation to adopt Chargers as the new school's mascot and dark green, gold and black as its colors. Chargers had been the mascot of the old Pilchuck High School, which merged with Marysville High School in 1975. Grove Elementary was chosen as the name for Marysville's 11th elementary school, which is scheduled to open in 2008. The school is at Grove Street and 67th Avenue Northeast. The naming committee also selected Totem Middle School as the new name for Marysville Junior High School, which will be reconfigured into a sixth- through eighth-grade school in fall 2007. Snohomish County PUD approves $608 million budget The Snohomish County Public Utility District board approved a $608 million budget last week for the utility's electrical system during 2007. The budget is an increase of $12 million, over the 2006 budget of $596 million. No rate adjustments are expected in 2007. The budget calls for $90 million in capital expenditures to provide funding for electrical-system infrastructure, including new substations, high-voltage distribution lines and new customer connections. Numerous electrical-system improvements are planned in the coming years to meet increased needs in the county. Nearly 10,000 new customer connections are expected in 2007. Next year's budget provides $15 million for conservation programs and $4.5 million for senior and low-income discounts. Everett Get acquainted with ECC oceanography High-school students interested in an early-college program focused on oceanography and marine sciences can attend an open house Thursday at Everett Community College. The college's Ocean Research College Academy (ORCA) is an early-college program for high-school students. Using a hands-on, project-based approach, high-school students earn up to two years of college credit for free while attending ORCA classes full time at Everett CC. Up to 60 students are accepted for the program each year. The open house will run from 6-8 p.m. at the Applied Technology Training Center, 2333 Seaway Blvd. Visitors can view student work, meet faculty and learn about the program. For more information, contact ORCA Director Ardi Kveven at 425-267-0156. Kingston Ferry service seeks permit extension Aqua Express, which operated a passenger ferry from Kingston to downtown Seattle until it suspended service a year ago, has asked for another extension of its permit. The state Utilities and Transportation Commission (UTC) had approved an extension until the end of this year. Aqua is asking that it be extended until next July. The run was suspended in October because of rising fuel costs and low ridership, and Aqua Express has been working with Kitsap Transit to resume service. The extension is subject to approval by the UTC. Snohomish County Thorndike elected to transit board Snohomish City Councilman Doug Thorndike has been elected to the Community Transit board of directors. Thorndike will serve as a representative of cities with populations under 10,000. The transit board is comprised of nine members who are elected officials from county or city jurisdictions within the agency's service area. The current board is made up of two representatives from the Snohomish County Council, two from cities with populations above 30,000, three from cities with populations from 10,000-30,000, and two from cities with populations under 10,000. Thorndike, who will serve on the board through January 2008, is a past mayor of Snohomish and was re-elected to the City Council in November 2005. Thorndike will serve the remainder of the term vacated by former Lake Stevens Mayor Lynn Walty, who resigned his position last month. Bothell Man, 21, gets string of DUI arrests Three times in barely more than a month. That's how many times the Washington State Patrol reports a Lake Forest Park man has been arrested and charged with drunken driving this fall. Dec. 1, Nicholas William Brady, 21, was arrested by Bothell police on suspicion of DUI and registered a 0.16 on a breath test, twice the state's 0.08 limit for intoxication, said Trooper Jeff Merrill, Patrol public-information officer. Brady was arrested by the King County Sheriff's Office Oct. 23 in Kenmore and registered a 0.19 on a breath test. On Nov. 13, the State Patrol arrested Brady again on suspicion of DUI. He refused to submit to a breath test and was booked into the King County Jail. Brady, beginning this week, faces a variety of court appearances on the charges. He's being held on $50,000 bail. Compiled from Times Snohomish County bureau reports.
