Allstate Insurance is getting out of the earthquake-insurance business in Washington and all other states, part of an industrywide rethinking about how much risk insurers are willing to face from rare but catastrophic events such as earthquakes and hurricanes. Letters were sent recently to about 40,000 affected Washington policyholders, notifying them Allstate would no longer offer earthquake coverage when their policies come up for renewal, said Caitlin Gorand, a spokeswoman in Allstate's regional office in Bothell. Allstate is one of the state's largest carriers. It insures about 245,000 homes, condos and rental units in Washington, and about 16 percent carry optional earthquake coverage. "We are taking steps as a company to limit the amount of risk exposure we have ... so we can maintain our profitability for the rest of our customers," Gorand said. She described the move as part of a companywide strategy to look hard at the company's exposure to natural disasters such as quakes and hurricanes. Allstate has arranged a partnership with a private insurer, GeoVera, allowing Allstate agents to write earthquake policies through that company, the largest private earthquake insurer in California, Gorand said. Homeowners also may choose to shop around for quotes from other insurance companies. Earthquake insurance can double the homeowners' insurance premium for wood-frame homes and may cost four to 10 times the annual premium for masonry structures, the NW Insurance Council says. Allstate's move worries state Insurance Commissioner Mike Kreidler. "If Allstate pulls back from certain types of coverage, my concern is, do other companies start following that same pattern?" Kreidler said. Hurricane Katrina added new urgency to the insurance industry's re-examination of the level of risk it is willing to take from catastrophic events, Kreidler said. Allstate and other insurance companies have been dropping customers or restricting new policies in hurricane-prone Florida and the Northeast, he said. It's unclear what long-term impact Allstate's decision will have on rates or availability of earthquake insurance here. Some Allstate policyholders who choose to get new policies through GeoVera could see their premiums rise or fall because GeoVera uses a different formula than Allstate did in setting rates, Gorand said. "At this point, earthquake-insurance coverage is still very much available," said Darrin Sanger with the NW Insurance Council. Fourteen of the council's 17 member companies write homeowners' insurance policies, and all of them either offer earthquake coverage themselves or allow agents to find coverage through third-party carriers, Sanger said. A recent poll of member companies on the anniversary of the Nisqually earthquake did not indicate any change on the horizon, Sanger said. Kreidler plans to talk informally with insurance executives at an upcoming national gathering of insurance commissioners to gauge whether other companies plan to withdraw from the earthquake-insurance market. Jolayne Houtz: 206-464-3122 or jhoutz@seattletimes.com
