PANGANDARAN, Indonesia — A tsunami crashed into beach resorts and fishing villages on Java island Monday, killing more than 300 people and leaving more than 160 missing after bulletins failed to reach the region because no warning system was in place. Java's coast was spared by the devastating Asian tsunami of 2004, but many residents recognized the danger when they saw the sea recede. At least 23,000 people fled their homes, either because they were destroyed or in fear of another tsunami, Dudi Junaidi, an official at an emergency coordination post in the worst-hit area of Pangandaran on Java's southern coast, said today. Frantic tourists and villagers shouted "Tsunami! Tsunami!" as the wave more than 6 feet high approached. Some climbed trees or fled to higher ground to escape while others crowded into inland mosques to pray. "We saw a big wall of black water. I ran with my son in my arms, when I looked back, the waves were at our house, they destroyed our house," said Ita Anita, who was on the beach with her 11-month-old and other relatives. "The water knocked me down, my son slipped out of my hands and was taken by the water." Anita, 20, and her husband live 30 feet from the beach in Pangandaran, a resort popular with tourists. Also on the beach were her son, mother, sister, brother, nephews. All except her mother are missing. She said a series of large waves as tall as coconut trees came, and then the water began to recede. "When the wave receded, there was total panic. Everybody was looking for everybody," Anita said from her hospital bed at the Pangandaran medical clinic. She said she was swept inland by the wave into a rice paddy, tossed around and dragged across asphalt before she managed to climb to safety on the roof of a house. Early today, desperate villagers and soldiers dug through destroyed homes and hotels looking for survivors as the death toll rose to at least 306. Junaidi said at least 172 people were killed and 85 others were missing in the Pangandaran area. He said a Pakistani national, a Swedish national and a Dutch national were among the dead, but did not give their genders. Most of the victims were believed to be Indonesians. In nearby Cilacap district, at least 77 were killed and more than 70 others were missing, said central Java Police Chief Dody Sumantiawan. At least 44 others died in Tasikmalaya, said Lina, a district official who like many Indonesians goes by only one name. Another 13 died elsewhere along the coast, local officials said. "I don't mind losing any of my property, but please God, return my son," said Basril, as he and wife tearfully searched though mounds of debris piled up on the beach at Pangandaran, a resort area popular with foreign tourists. Nearby, the body of a woman lay on the beach, covered with a mat. At the Pangandaran clinic, 46 bodies were laid out in yellow body bags, and weeping family members were coming in and identifying the dead. "We are still evacuating areas and cross-checking data," Red Cross official Arifin Muhadi said. Regional agencies had warned that a 7.7-magnitude earthquake that struck 150 miles off Indonesia's southern coast was strong enough to create a tsunami on Java. But there was no warning system for those on the southern coast. Meanwhile, thousands of terrified residents set up camp in the hills overlooking the sea. The waves sent boats, cars and motorbikes crashing into resorts and fishing villages. Houses and restaurants were flattened along a 110-mile stretch of the densely populated island's southern coast. Jan Boeken, 53, from Antwerp, Belgium, said he was sitting at a bar when his waiter started screaming. "I looked back at the beach and saw a big wall of thundering black water coming toward us," said Boeken, who escaped with minor cuts to his head and knees. "I ran, but I got trapped in the kitchen. I couldn't get out. I got hit in the body by debris and my lungs filled with water." A witness told el-Shinta radio station he saw the ocean withdraw 1,500 feet from the beach a half-hour before the powerful wave smashed ashore, a typical phenomenon before a tsunami. "I could see fish jumping around on the ocean floor," Miswan said. Witnesses said the wave came several hundred yards inland in some places. Roads were blocked and power cut to much of the area.Caption:  photo, mapBay Ismoyo / Getty Images : Volunteers and rescuers carry the body of a tsunami victim Tuesday at a hospital in Pangandaran, on Java's southern coast, after a strong earthquake triggered a devastating wave.The Associated Press: Quake, tsunami hit Java island (GHC12ST7C)
