A little more than five years ago, the 6.8 magnitude Nisqually Quake shook the central Puget Sound basin, causing nearly $3 billion damage and spawning 9,500 insurance claims. The fault that caused it isn't even the most problematic in a Northwest crisscrossed with them. One off the Washington coast is substantial enough to cause a magnitude 9 quake and catastrophic damage. Yet only 12 to 15 percent of local homeowners carry earthquake insurance, according to Karl Newman, president of the Seattle-based NW Insurance Council. Some owners may not have it because they believe — erroneously — that their regular homeowners' policy covers quakes, Newman said. Others may be put off by the cost, which can vary widely depending on the company, the location of the home, construction type, age and other factors. "Earthquake insurance may double the cost to insure a wood-frame home," Newman said. But, he says, carrying quake and regular homeowners coverage "is still lower than most of us pay to insure two family cars for a year." High deductibles also might make some homeowners hesitate to buy earthquake coverage. Indeed, damage generally has to exceed 10 percent of the worth of the home before the coverage kicks in. Additionally, some quake policies treat the home and contents separately, so that 10 percent deductible would apply twice. But as Newman explained, quake insurance isn't intended for minor or moderate damage. It's for "very serious damage or total destruction of your home." "The high deductibles keep premiums lower and help make the coverage more affordable," he said. High deductibles are why most homeowners who suffered damage in the Nisqually quake didn't submit insurance claims, said Stephanie Marquis, spokeswoman for the Washington Insurance Commissioner. "Most people here didn't meet the deductibles," she said. But there's no guarantee that will be true after the next earthquake. Currently, some 48 companies offer quake insurance to Washington homeowners, according to insurance-information provider A.M. Best. Some companies offer policies to homeowners in general, others only to those who already have homeowners insurance with them. Additionally, some may require a property inspection before agreeing to issue a policy and may require that an older home be bolted to its foundation. Some firms won't cover masonry homes or homes in certain locations. "If one company turns a homeowner down, that doesn't mean another one would," Newman said. In the end, he said, the decision to buy quake coverage is a personal one. But even if you have quake insurance, Newman suggests taking steps now to minimize potential damage. Among his suggestions: • Secure your water heater, washer and dryer to the floor or wall studs. • Replace copper gas and water pipes with flexible lines. • Secure pictures, mirrors, shelves and light fixtures by drilling eyebolts into wall studs. The same goes for bookcases. Elizabeth Rhodes: erhodes@seattletimes.com
