ALLAI VALLEY, Pakistan — The brisk sale of nails and iron sheeting is more of a silver lining than Anwal Faroze could have asked for. His small hardware shop, sitting in one of the most remote valleys in Pakistan's earthquake zone, sells more supplies now than ever before in 16 years of business. "There is more need now. People are busy reconstructing," says Faroze, his bushy beard underscoring a bright smile. His revival is symbolic of the nation's recovery more than a year and nearly two frigid winters after a devastating earthquake killed 73,000 people in one of the worst natural disasters in human history. There are other encouraging signs in this destitute valley: Local organizations and relief agencies are picking up where the military and international relief organizations — both now considerably diminished — have left off. Old social and economic mechanisms have sprung back to life, and new, transformative processes brought by the outside world — whether in attitudes toward women or livelihoods — have taken on a life of their own, nurtured by locals intent not only on recuperation, but progress. The Oct. 8, 2005, earthquake destroyed more than 200,000 homes — some 10,000 in Allai Valley alone — leaving more than 3 million homeless in Kashmir and the North West Frontier Province. When the Himalayan winter came last year with brutal force, some 600,000 people huddled in hurriedly made tents. Now winter has come again, but this time, only 30,000 people are left in camps, according to the International Organization on Migration (IOM). Not that the challenge is over. Few homes are completely reconstructed, meaning that nearly 2 million will face another winter in temporary shelters, according to an assessment by OxFam International. "This is what we wanted — that the communities take charge of their lives," says Lt. Gen. Ahmed Nadeem, Deputy Director of the government's Earthquake Reconstruction and Rehabilitation Authority (ERRA). "I already see signs that they're turning this adversity into an opportunity." Most observers agree it will be months before local civil administrations can function on their own. In the meantime, a web of international and local organizations will work together with hobbled administrators and the military. But there will be holes. Saeem Muhammad Kiani is one of those who slipped through. More than a year after the earthquake, he and his community of 35 families still live in tents in Chella Bandi, a Muzaffarabad enclave. The earthquake sent their homes tumbling down a hillside. "Due to the winter, most of our children are already sick," says Kiani, who must wait for the government to identify new land where his community can rebuild. In the second winter, this is one of the small worries in the otherwise large picture of encouragement, says Andrew Macleod, the relief-to-recovery transition adviser to the United Nations resident coordinator and to the deputy director of ERRA. Even in valleys as remote as Allai, where more than 2,000 died among a population of 148,000, most survivors have received disaster aid from the government to rebuild. A cash infusion of roughly $1,600 so far per family has reached 475,000 of the 600,000 households affected, totaling almost $500 million. This winter will be cold, but no crises are expected. Survivors are well-stocked with blankets, quilts and winter clothes, observers say. Save the Children USA is handing out more than 4,500 winter kits for children in Allai, complementing 25,000 corrugated iron sheets the Army sent for shelters. The International Federation of Red Cross and Red Crescent Societies is airlifting supplies, including 40,000 quilts, to almost 100,000 people. "This was the biggest natural-disaster response in the history of humanity. What we've seen in the last 12 months will be seen as one of the best models of early recovery," says Macleod.Caption:  mapThe Associated Press : Islamabad, Pakistan (GMF16D5NN)
