WASHINGTON — The mining technique used in the Crandall Canyon Mine in Huntington, Utah, where six miners are trapped, involved collapsing the roof of the mine, a method that dislodges such a tremendous volume of earth with such force that it causes quake activity. "It's the most dangerous type of mining that there is," said Tony Oppegard, a mining lawyer and former federal mine-safety official. In June, U.S. regulators approved a roof-control plan for the "room and pillar" technique, also known as "retreat mining," at the mine, 140 miles south of Salt Lake City. It's a delicate endeavor: Columns of coal are left in place to hold up the roof while the vein is tapped. Once the reserves have been extracted, the miners harvest the last of the coal on the way out, cutting carefully into the pillars and scrambling out of the way as the roof caves in. The final column to be slashed is known among miners as the "suicide pillar." The Mine Safety and Health Administration, which is part of the Department of Labor, signed off on Crandall Canyon's pillar-safety plan, spokeswoman Amy Louviere said. The mining agency will investigate whether the mine was complying with the agreed-upon procedures. Robert Murray, president and chief executive of the company that operates the mine, said Tuesday that there was no retreat mining in the immediate vicinity of the miners and that the collapse was caused by an earthquake. But Don Blakeman, an analyst at the National Earthquake Information Center in Golden, Colo., said Monday's tremor near the mine — registering 3.9 on the Richter scale — "just doesn't look like a natural event." Seismographers at the University of Utah said wave patterns from the shock were consistent with the type "induced by underground coal mining," but they said the possibility of a quake having occurred along nearby fault lines could not be ruled out. In the Utah coal belt, university scientists said, mine tremors account for about 25 percent of the seismic activity; the rest is produced by tectonic-plate activity. But if Murray is right and a natural earthquake caused the collapse, it would be a first in Utah. "We haven't seen an earthquake followed by a mine collapse," said Relu Burlacu, manager of the university's seismograph stations, although the opposite has occurred. Initial studies suggest particular mining areas are creating most of the tremors. "We've seen events in the vicinity of this mine in the past," Burlacu said. Most of the seismic activity, he added, is caused by mining at deeper levels. The Crandall Canyon miners are 1,500 feet underground. Late Tuesday, Murray said seismic activity "totally shut down" efforts to reach the six miners and wiped out all the work done in the past day. "We are back to square one underground," he said. The National Earthquake Information Center in Colorado said 10 seismic shocks have been recorded since the collapse, the most recent one at 3:42 p.m. Tuesday with a magnitude of 1.7. Material from The Associated Press is included in this report. Setting off quakes Seismic waves of 3.9 magnitude were recorded in the area of a mine in Utah after it collapsed. Scientists believe the collapse caused the disturbance. Some other U.S. mine collapses that also produced earthquakelike activity: Nov. 2, 2006: Mine in southwest Virginia, seismic reading of 4.3. March 6, 2000: Mine in central Utah, seismic reading of 4.2. Jan. 29, 2000: Mine in southwestern Wyoming, seismic reading of 4.4. May 13, 1999: Abandoned mine under Kansas City, Kan., seismic reading of 3.0. Jan. 19, 1999: Coal mine 15 miles northeast of Tuscaloosa, Ala., seismic reading of 4.0. Feb. 3, 1995: Mine in southwestern Wyoming, seismic reading of 5.4. March 12, 1994: Akzo Nobel salt mine in western New York, seismic reading of 3.6. Sources: Associated Press archives, U.S. Geological Survey The Associated Press
