LIMA, Peru — Relief officials urgently appealed for more aid Thursday for earthquake survivors along Peru's shattered southern coast. Medical help, blankets and tents top the list, along with food, water and latrines. Two weeks after the devastating quake, survivors are huddling in cardboard shelters in desperate, unhygienic conditions, said Doctors Without Borders spokesman François Dumont, speaking from the town of Guadalupe. "We found the town completely destroyed," Dumont said, whose group has 35 people operating mobile clinics and offering psychological counseling in the disaster zone. The magnitude 8 earthquake on Aug. 15 leveled most of Pisco, a port city 125 miles southeast of Lima, killing at least 519 people, injuring 1,366 and destroying 40,000 homes. Despite substantial help initially from Latin America, Europe, Japan and the United States, some 200,000 people still need still need help to save their lives, said Elisabeth Byrs, spokeswoman for the U.N.'s humanitarian affairs office, which has appealed for $37 million more in donations. Peru estimates the cost of rebuilding these coastal towns to be $220 million. Other estimates run much higher. President Alan Garcia also has promised financial aid and jobs to quake survivors. Garcia said help was reaching 95 percent of victims. Last week, he noted that electricity had been restored to 90 percent of the city of Ica and 60 percent of Chincha. But U.N. officials blame poor organization and coordination for patchwork aid response, especially in rural areas. Trucks carrying aid have been spotted far from the disaster zone, raising fears of stolen donations. And politicians are feuding over the relief effort. Federal lawmakers created a rebuilding fund Tuesday, but the president of the Ica province, Romulo Triveno, created a parallel fund and blasted the central government's effort as a violation of regional autonomy. The quake also badly damaged at least 173 churches, monuments and historic buildings, said the director of the National Culture Institute, Cecilia Bakula. Experts say it could have been much worse if the quake had struck closer to Lima, a metropolis of 8 million where many homes are built of adobe on sandy soil, just like the ones that crumbled in Pisco. Many of Lima's adobe buildings rise five stories tall, with walls reinforced with nothing more than thick reeds mixed with mud.Caption:  photoErnesto Benavides / AFP/Getty Images : People waiting for the distribution of food break the line and take whatever they can in Pisco, Peru, last week.
