Peruvians began the grim task of counting their dead last week after a magnitude-8 earthquake collapsed scores of buildings Wednesday night in the desert region. More than 500 people perished in the two-minute-long earthquake, whose epicenter was 95 miles south of the capital city of Lima. At least 18 aftershocks of magnitude 5 or greater have been recorded. Delays in aid distribution meant tens of thousands of Peruvians were becoming desperate. Many cities still have no electricity, water or phone service. In the port city of Pisco, hardest-hit by the quake, more than 300 people have died, officials say. In nearby Ica, a city of 120,000, a quarter of the buildings collapsed. News of note Here at home I-5 work is days ahead of schedule The traffic-clogging work on north Interstate 5 could be finished by Aug. 25, five days early. Good weather, added manpower and quick-setting paving are helping to speed up the project. Largest biodiesel plant opens in Hoquiam The nation's largest biodiesel plant, Imperium Renewables, opened in Hoquiam last week. The plant will employ 50 to 60 people, and it has the ability to produce 100 million gallons of biodiesel a year. The nation Shuttle not at risk from tile damage, NASA says Astronauts aboard Endeavour won't fix a deep gouge in the shuttle's exterior tiles before the shuttle returns to Earth this week. The gash is considered too small to be catastrophic, but it could weaken the aluminum frame and result in lengthy postflight repairs. Storms cause trouble around country Tropical Storm Erin drenched Texas, while Tropical Storm Flossie swiped Hawaii with intermittent rain and moderate winds. Forecasters are closely watching Hurricane Dean, which is expected to hit Jamaica today. Mattel recalls 9 million more toys Toy-maker Mattel has recalled 9 million Chinese-made toys because they contain lead paint or tiny magnets that could be swallowed. It's the second time in two weeks that Mattel, the nation's largest toy maker, has recalled hazardous Chinese-made toys. 3 die trying to save trapped Utah miners Three rescue workers were killed and six others were injured by a cave-in at the Crandall Canyon mine near Huntington, Utah, and the rescue operation was suspended indefinitely. The workers were part of an effort to find six miners trapped in a cave-in almost two weeks ago. The world Blasts target Iraq sect Officials said the death toll may reach 500 in a series of coordinated bombings that targeted Iraq's non-Muslim Yazidi ethnic minority. Business Fed cuts rate to boost economy The Federal Reserve slashed a key lending rate by a half percentage point, its most dramatic effort yet to alleviate the fears about tightening credit that have caused wild swings in global financial markets. Sports Sonics say they're sincere about Seattle Sonics minority owner Aubrey McClendon told an Oklahoma newspaper that he always meant for the team to move there, but principal owner Clay Bennett and McClendon himself later downplayed the comments, insisting the team sincerely wants an arena deal in Seattle.
