TOKYO — Officials ordered the world's biggest nuclear power plant to be idled indefinitely Wednesday after the government acknowledged it was not built to withstand the force of a quake that hit Japan's northwest coast, and that it might be sitting on top of a previously undiscovered fault line. The revelations could have broad implications for plans to increase the percentage of electricity that comes from nuclear energy in an economic powerhouse that rests on highly volatile geological plates, but has little coal, and no oil or natural gas. Japan already generates about a third of its electricity from nuclear power. The government had previously rejected claims that the plant was atop an active fault. "It is possible that the epicenter of the fault line runs under the power plant," said Akira Fukushima, deputy director-general for safety at the industry ministry's nuclear agency. He said the revised opinion was based on an examination of aftershock data from Monday's 6.8-magnitude quake by the Japan Meteorological Agency. The new data show that, while Monday's quake was centered six miles below the seabed just offshore, its fault line extends inland and includes the area under the facility. "This earthquake was much bigger than the plant had been designed for," said Fukushima, who added that the government is examining whether the country's other nuclear reactors meet tougher design standards introduced last year. Investigators also revealed the Kashiwazaki plant suffered more damage than they first acknowledged, undercutting official reassurances that Japan's nuclear plants are earthquake-proof. After initially giving an all-clear, Tokyo Electric Power (Tepco), which owns and operates the reactors, now says it has uncovered 53 quake-related problems, from the fire that broke out in an electrical transformer to broken pipes and low levels of radioactivity in ventilation stack filters. Japan already has 55 nuclear plants, and its national energy plan calls for nuclear power to meet as much as 40 percent of the country's demand by 2010. But critics long have warned that many of the country's 1970s- and 80s-vintage plants are vulnerable to earthquakes. Of concern to many experts is the Hamaoka plant, which sits atop an active fault line on a peninsula just 100 miles south of the Tokyo metropolitan area. Tepco's 17 nuclear plants were temporarily shut down in 2003 after it admitted falsifying safety inspection reports. On Wednesday, the mayor of Kashiwazaki, a city of about 93,000 people, ordered Tepco executives to keep the plant closed until it could be certified as safe. The power shortage has already had wider economic effects: a key auto parts maker in the region was forced to close for now, leading Toyota and other automobile manufacturers to scale back production.Caption:  mapThe Associated Press: Fissures and fusion (GOV19LMV2)
