JAKARTA, Indonesia — A powerful earthquake flattened hundreds of buildings in western Indonesia today, killing at least 26 people and overwhelming hospitals with injured, officials and witnesses said. The magnitude-6.3 quake on Sumatra island was felt in neighboring Malaysia and hundreds of miles away in Singapore, where some office buildings were evacuated. Local TV station SCTV reported that 26 people had been killed, citing correspondents in the area. Officials were not immediately available to confirm that figure but earlier said nine people had died. The dead included at least two children and a teacher killed when a two-story building crashed onto a playground in the Sumatran town of Solok, said police spokesman Supriadi, who like many Indonesians goes by only one name. Hundreds of buildings collapsed, including a crowded state bank, and hospitals were struggling to cope with a flood of patients, many suffering cuts and broken bones, Supriadi said. At least one hospital was evacuated. The U.S. Geological Survey said the quake struck 20 miles below Solok, on Sumatra's western coast. It was followed by several strong aftershocks that sent residents pouring into the streets, shattered windows and toppled power lines. "Everything in my house fell down ... a cabinet hit me," said Rahma Nurjana, a Padang resident. "My neighbor's house collapsed." The temblor and at least one of the aftershocks were felt in Singapore, 265 miles from the epicenter, forcing the evacuation of several older office buildings, TV station Channel NewsAsia reported. In Malaysia's southern coastal city of Johor, citizens fled offices, buildings and shopping centers. Indonesia, the world's largest archipelago, is prone to seismic upheaval due to its location on the so-called Pacific "Ring of Fire," an arc of volcanoes and fault lines encircling the Pacific Basin. In December 2004, a massive earthquake struck off Indonesia's Sumatra island and triggered a tsunami that killed more than 230,000 people, including 131,000 people in Indonesia's Aceh province alone. A tsunami off Java island last year killed nearly 5,000.
