PISCO, Peru — Gloria Granda hastens to the police lines as firefighters deliver the latest body bag from the rubble. "My son?" she inquires. "A girl," says the man from the identification unit. A painful vigil is prolonged. But so is hope. "I pray he is alive," Granda says of her son, Maximiliano "Max" Campoblanco Granda, last seen Wednesday, the day of the catastrophe. "Has anyone seen him?" she asks of no one in particular in the central plaza. It has been four days since a magnitude 8.0 earthquake centered offshore in the Pacific shook Peru, killing at least 540 people, mostly in this coastal city and the nearby towns of Ica and Chincha. The Plaza de Armas, once a peaceful refuge, has been transformed into a bustling nerve center for rescue, cleanup and aid operations in Pisco, site of more than 70 percent of the fatalities. Buildings on all sides of the plaza lay buckled and wrecked, none more ominous than the shell of San Clemente Roman Catholic Church, where rescuers have pulled 133 bodies from the ruins. The church's two bell towers and its cupola still stand, but the heavy roof is gone, having tumbled down on more than 200 worshippers when the quake struck just as an evening Mass was concluding. "We always maintain hope that we will find more survivors," says Cmdr. Jorge Vera, the fire chief who heads a force of more than 500 Peruvian and international rescue workers, including firefighters, dog-sniffing teams and tunneling experts. "But, as time goes by, we also have to be realistic." The last survivor was pulled from the rubble Saturday morning, Vera notes, "in pretty bad shape." Across the street from the firemen's command post, a bulletin board displays the names of the missing. Many have been crossed out with the notation fallecido, dead. A few bear the designation vivo, alive. About 50 remain missing, including Granda's son. With the arrival of each body bag, Granda approaches the police lines that delineate an open-air morgue. Unidentified corpses are stored in a white refrigerator trailer, normally used for frozen seafood. A bulletin board gives some details of those inside: One is a 50ish man who wore a white shirt with blue stripes and a cap advertising Flor de Cana, a popular rum; another man, closer to 60, was wearing a polo shirt with the emblem of the Peruvian national soccer team "It's hard work," says Luis Bromley, head of Peru's Institute of Legal Medicine, which is charged with identifying the bodies. "The children, in particular, pose a problem. They don't carry any identification." A priest stands by to administer last rites and comfort the afflicted. "I tell them the dead are angels who will look after their families from heaven," says Father Fabricio Landeo, part of a bolstered corps of clerics from Lima. Rescue workers bring a bag with the remains of a young girl. A pair of distraught parents appear as if from nowhere. The father makes a quick identification. Despair overcomes the mother, who moans without consolation. The girl is Patricia Alexandra Anchante Martinez, 15. She sang in the church choir, says one of the forensic technicians seated at a table with blank death certificates. Everyone wears surgical masks, protection from the stench of death and the dust from pulverized adobe. Uncollected garbage and broken sewage lines complete the noxious ambience. Workers produce a slate-colored coffin, courtesy of the government. They lift the girl's remains inside, then hoist the coffin onto a beat-up yellow pickup. It heads for the cemetery, the busiest place in town after the plaza. On the streets outside, residents are trying to salvage what they can from their destroyed homes. "The thieves will come and take everything," says Alejandro Talledo, sitting alongside a pile of life's acquisitions: drawers of clothing, a refrigerator, a television set, a stuffed dog.Caption:  photoRodrigo Arangua / AFP/Getty Images : An earthquake victim is buried Sunday in the cemetery of Pisco, Peru, where a mass grave holds hundreds of corpses.
