PISCO, Peru — Rescuers gave up hope of finding any more survivors and concentrated Monday on clearing tons of rubble from the streets of this southern port city leveled by a powerful earthquake that killed at least 540 people. The magnitude-8 quake on Wednesday destroyed more than 85 percent of the homes in Pisco. Rescue workers have removed 148 bodies from a church in the city after its domed ceiling broke apart during the earthquake. It was not clear how many of the 300 congregants inside survived the shaking that lasted for an agonizing two minutes. Jorge Vera, a firefighter who led the operation to find survivors at the San Clemente church, said Sunday the rescue work had stopped and the focus was now on recovering the bodies. Friday was the last time a survivor was pulled from the quake's debris. Meanwhile, the government was preparing to rebuild Pisco. President Alan Garcia said Monday in Lima, after returning from the quake zone, that plans include providing small homes to people who lost their houses. The new homes would be made of concrete blocks and steel rods designed to withstand earthquakes better than unreinforced adobe. The Civil Defense estimated the quake destroyed 35,214 homes — including 16,000 in Pisco and 16,010 in nearby Chincha. Garcia also said 1,200 soldiers had restored calm to the streets where days earlier, hungry quake victims looted aid trucks and markets. Some 280 planes arrived with 600 tons of food and other supplies destined for quake survivors, and navy ships had brought potable water. But only a trickle of aid was reaching hard-hit mountain communities further inland, said Yerma Canales, director of social services in Castrovirreyna, 140 miles southeast of Lima. "Help has not gotten to us yet, just a minimal part," Canales said. She said the region's adobe houses were severely damaged in the quake. Families moved outdoors for their safety, where children are falling ill in the cold weather. Aid workers estimated during the weekend that up to 80 percent of people in urban quake-hit areas may not have access to clean water. Local media reported late Sunday that a 12-year-old boy in the village of Guadalupe near Pisco was killed when a wall of his house fell on top of him after a magnitude-5.6 aftershock.
