DONGHEKOU, China — Two rivers blocked by landslides threatened to flood towns shattered by China's massive earthquake, sending thousands of survivors fleeing Saturday in a region still staggering from the country's worst disaster in 30 years. A mountain sheared off by the mighty tremor cut the Qingzhu river and swallowed the riverside village of Donghekou whole, entombing an unknown number of people inside a huge mound of brown earth. Compounding the horror for survivors, a lake rising behind the wall of debris threatened to break its banks and send torrents cascading into villages downstream. Panicky residents streamed out of the entire county on the northern edge of the quake zone, spurred on by cellphone text messages sent en masse by local government officials warning that the water level was rising and people downstream were being evacuated. In the town of Beichuan, 60 miles to the south, thousands fled as the reports circulated. Rescue work resumed later in the day and experts were monitoring the river above Beichuan, the People's Daily newspaper said on its Web site. The swift exodus underscored the jitters running through the disaster zone. A strong aftershock — the second in two days and measured by the U.S. Geological Survey at magnitude 5.7 — shook the area early today for 45 seconds, causing people to run into the streets. In all the devastation wrought by the quake, little looked as bleak as Donghekou. The road to the village ended in a tangled twist of metal and tar. In the small valley below, the village itself disappeared when the mountain collapsed. Locals said two other villages farther upstream, Ciban and Kangle, suffered the same fate. The three villages were home to about 300 families, locals said. Eerie and still, the remaining landscape had few signs of human life — a soiled green floral scarf, a rubber pipe, a log. "Oh God! I have lost everything," said Wen Xiaoying, 32, whose voice shook as she surveyed the valley below for the first time since returning from far-off Guangdong province where she worked. She held up one hand as she checked off the family members who had died — her father, her mother, her sister and her brother-in-law — all of them buried somewhere in the muck before her. Drizzling rain in the valley added to the gloom, and to the fear of carloads of people who clogged the twisting mountain roads as they streamed out of the region. The government's daily update added another few thousand bodies to the death toll as it continued climbing toward an expected final tally of at least 50,000. Cabinet spokesman Guo Weimin said 28,881 deaths have been confirmed so far. The official Xinhua news agency, citing regional officials, said more than 10,600 people were known to be still buried almost one week after the 7.9 magnitude quake hit, shattering thousands of buildings in Sichuan province. The number of security forces helping victims rose to almost 150,000, and the government added cash payments to victims to its response. The government would give $715 in compensation to each family that lost a member in the earthquake, China National Radio reported Saturday on its Web site. At a State Council meeting hosted by Premier Wen Jiabao in Beijing, the government also decided it would hand out a daily ration of food and $1.40 to survivors.Caption:  photoVincent Yu / The Associated Press : With floods threatening, two residents, lugging their belongings, leave Beichuan county in southwest China's Sichuan province on Saturday.
