LONDON — This is a bad time to be a purveyor of $1,800 pens. Or a seller of champagne, sports cars or big bouquets of flowers. Few people feel like splurging in the City, as London's financial district is known. Instead, it is convulsing from the aftershocks of the crisis on Wall Street. Thousands of jobs have already been lost, financial institutions have disappeared overnight, rumors swirl — and no one knows where it will end. After years of economic boom in which City workers became famous for six-figure bonuses, lavish lunches and champagne-fueled parties, the mood has turned somber. In cafes and pubs, as well as on trading floors, everyone is talking about the crisis that — this week alone — has seen the bankruptcy filing by U.S. investment bank Lehman Brothers, the U.S. government bailout of insurer AIG, and the takeover of foundering British bank HBOS by rival Lloyds TSB. "People are fearing for their jobs," said John Allsopp, who works in IT for a U.S. investment bank. "And you just wonder how it got here." The financial earthquake that began in the U.S. subprime housing market has shaken economies around the world. Central banks from the Bank of Japan to the European Central Bank have pumped cash into money markets in a bid to revive interbank lending and stop the crisis of confidence in the world financial system. In Russia, stock exchanges have been closed since Wednesday as authorities try to stem a plummet in share prices. But many Russians — few of whom own stocks — seem convinced by their leaders' assurances that all will be well. "I don't really see what all this has to do with me," said Nataliya Zobnina, 35, a shopkeeper at a Moscow mall. "I guess the only people being affected are the big players on the market." Ireland is among the hardest hit in Europe. An economy that boomed by wooing hundreds of U.S. companies with low corporate taxes is now on the brink of recession. Spain, whose buoyant economy was once Europe's envy, also is watching the financial turmoil with particular worry. After the collapse of the construction boom that drove a decade of economic growth, Spain is saddled with stagnant growth, 10.7 percent unemployment and inflation at nearly 5 percent. Even France — whose strong state involvement in the economy offers a measure of insulation — is not immune. The finance minister has warned that mortgages will be tougher to get as banks tighten lending. The media are feeding jitters with stories about families struggling to get credit and French bankers in London fearing for their jobs. The British economy is particularly vulnerable, thanks to a fast-deflating housing market, high levels of personal debt and a heavy reliance on the financial and business services sector, which accounts for more than 6 million jobs — or a fifth of all British jobs. High-end supermarket chain Waitrose has reported slumping profits, while cut-rate rivals are booming. Alcohol, cigarette and candy makers all report healthy sales as people turn to affordable luxuries while cutting back on big-ticket spending. London theaters had a bumper year in 2007, but nervously await the impact of the current crisis. Impresario Andrew Lloyd Webber has tried to lighten the gloom by offering free tickets to "The Sound of Music" and "Joseph and the Amazing Technicolor Dreamcoat" to laid-off bankers. For now, some are keeping faith in the resilience of Britain's august financial institutions. "Until we see the collapse of Lloyd's of London, we won't panic," said Alan Booth, who runs a flower shop in the shadow of the 320-year-old insurance market's high-rise headquarters.Caption:  photoSang Tan / The Associated Press : A blackboard advertises cut-price champagne at the front of a wine bar in the City of London on Thursday.
