BEIJING — In a system with a centuries-long tradition of austere leaders laying down the mandate of heaven from behind their palace walls, China's response to the worst natural disaster in 30 years reveals a nation in the throes of political evolution. The scale of destruction is so vast — and the horizon for a return to normalcy so distant — that it is difficult to imagine a carefree crowd in Beijing when the country plays host to the highly-anticipated Olympic Games beginning Aug. 8. The 7.9-magnitude quake that struck Monday compromised what was shaping up as a golden opportunity for President Hu Jintao and other leaders to rally support among China's 1.3 billion people for continuing the party's monopoly on power indefinitely. The country's shared anger over Olympic torch-relay protests and heightened security concerns that followed protest in Tibet over domination by the Chinese had already created a less friendly environment here for foreigners. The party has long justified its refusal to relinquish power with the argument that it alone can deliver the efficient governance and shrewd guidance China needs. When the quake hit, Hu and his lieutenants appeared to realize what was at stake, moving swiftly to mobilize the party machinery. He Guoqiang, head of the party's Central Discipline Inspection Commission, publicly warned party officials that their careers would depend on how they handled the crisis. The party's initial response, marshaling a vast relief operation within hours, generated a groundswell of support. Even in their misery, victims expressed satisfaction at seeing rescue teams show up from the People's Liberation Army and People's Armed Police. They were also quick to thank the thousands of party-organized civilian-relief workers handing out water, food and tents. The feeling that the government was going all-out to help extended beyond the affected area to the country as a whole, according to Kang Xiaoguang, a sociologist at Beijing's Renmin University. "Chinese people are quite satisfied with what the government is doing," he said. "The government's response is much better than it has been in the past." Premier Wen Jiabao, who flew to the disaster zone Monday afternoon, spent the entire week visiting devastated towns and villages, sympathizing with bereaved families and giving pep talks to military and civilian rescue teams. Wen's on-the-scene leadership, recorded by cameras from the party's China Central Television network, was broadcast in great detail on the national news, making him the face of the party at work for the people. The thousands of Chinese civilians who volunteered to help — or were volunteered by party organizations — also appeared swept up in the common cause. Caravans of relief supplies moved toward the quake zone festooned with red banners bearing party slogans popular since the 1960s. "Fight the earthquake," they read, recalling the rallying cry of Red Guards after the 1976 earthquake in Tangshan, in northeastern China, that killed 240,000 people. Other volunteer groups were dispatched by private businesses; one convoy of supplies was led by a Porsche Cayenne four-wheel-drive vehicle — reflecting the segment of society that has prospered handsomely as China's economy has boomed. "The whole society is mobilized," Kang said. The enthusiasm, he noted, was encouraged by the vigorous initial coverage in the normally tightly censored Chinese news media, a change from coverage of past natural disasters in China and, in the first few days, matched by friendliness toward reporters. As early as Tuesday, however, the Politburo's senior propaganda officials, under Li Changchun of the elite Standing Committee, ordered journalists to make sure their coverage was inspirational and emphasized rescue and relief efforts. By Thursday, police, soldiers and local officials began blocking roads leading to the worst-hit areas. Their orders were to keep reporters out, they said, particularly foreign reporters. By that point, some villagers had begun to complain that rescue officials were bulldozing ruins with people still trapped under debris. In several towns where children were killed when schools collapsed, parents accused local officials of allowing shoddy construction materials to be used in return for bribes. The crisis, Hu said on his arrival in the quake zone Friday, had entered its "most crucial phase." Earthquake developments Death toll: The official death toll rose to 22,069, with nearly 170,000 injured. China says it expects the number dead to approach 50,000. Aftershock: A strong magnitude 5.5 aftershock hit China's battered Sichuan region on Friday, causing landslides, knocking out telephone lines and burying vehicles, according to state media. There were no immediate reports of deaths. Seattle Times news servicesCaption:  photoPaula Bronstein / Getty Images : Rescue workers and the military on Friday dig out bodies buried in a collapsed school in China. The 7.9-magnitude quake struck Monday, and thousands of people remain buried in rubble.
