WELLS, Nev. — Windows shattered and building facades and signs fell, but no one was seriously injured when a powerful earthquake shook Wells on Thursday. The quake, which had an estimated magnitude of 6.0, according to the U.S. Geological Survey's (USGS) National Earthquake Information Center in Golden, Colo., struck at 6:16 a.m. and was centered in a sparsely populated area 11 miles southeast of Wells near the Nevada-Utah line. Donna Anderson, of Wells, said the quake "just immediately jumped into rattling the walls." She said it seemed as if the shaking went on for "five or six hours" but probably lasted only a few minutes. The temblor was felt across much of the West, from northern Idaho and Utah to Southern California, and more than a dozen aftershocks were reported, officials said. The most serious damage was reported in Wells' largely unoccupied historic district, where 20 to 25 buildings were "heavily damaged," Elko County Sheriff's Sgt. Kevin McKinney said. Brick facades tumbled off several buildings, signs fell and windows broke, and some vehicles were damaged by falling debris, KELK Radio in Elko reported. The town of about 1,300 was closed to all but residents, the Nevada Highway Patrol said. Three injuries were reported, but they were "not very serious: a broken arm, some head lacerations, some difficulty breathing," McKinney said. Newmont Mining Chief Executive Officer Richard O'Brien said an inspection of the underground gold mines in the area "found no deficiencies." Located in the high desert along the California Trail traveled by Western pioneers, Wells was founded by Central Pacific Railroad in the 1860s. Thursday's quake temporarily disrupted the railroad now owned by Union Pacific. Tony Lowry, an assistant professor of geophysics at Utah State University, said the size of the quake and its location were unusual. "In that part of Nevada, I don't think we've seen any like that in the last 150 years or so," Lowry said.Caption:  photo, mapRoss Anderson / Elko Daily Free Press : The historic district of Wells, Nev., was damaged Thursday morning by a 6.0 magnitude earthquake. Brick facades tumbled off several buildings, signs fell and windows broke.The Associated Press: Magnitude 6.0 earthquake (G1Q1DFE3O)
