CHENGDU, China — A government warning of a major aftershock sent thousands of panicked survivors running into the darkened streets late Monday following an unprecedented display of mourning for more than 34,000 people killed in last week's earthquake. In shattered Sichuan province, quake-weary residents carried pillows, blankets and chairs from homes into the open or slept in cars after the National Seismology Bureau warned there was a "rather great" chance of an aftershock measuring magnitude 6 to 7. People in the provincial capital of Chengdu got in their cars and drove east — toward plains and away from the quake zone to the northwest. In Mianyang, closer to the quake zone, a hospital moved patients into the square outside the rail station, setting up beds, medicine trays and tents. The alarm compounded uneasiness in the region, which has been rumbled by dozens of aftershocks since the May 12 quake, including one Monday night that measured at magnitude 5.2 by the U.S. Geological Survey. No damage or injuries were reported. It came a few hours after China's more than 1 billion people paused at 2:28 p.m. for three minutes of mourning to commemorate victims of last week's quake. Many said it was the biggest display of mourning in China since the death of Mao Zedong in 1976. With each passing day since the quake struck, there is more to grieve. The Chinese government announced Monday that more than 200 rescue workers had perished over the last two days, mainly because of landslides set off by aftershocks. There was little detail provided, except that 158 of those killed were transportation workers who had been buried while trying to repair a road leading to the epicenter in the town of Wenchuan in Sichuan province. The confirmed death toll from last week's magnitude 7.9 earthquake was raised Monday to more than 34,000 and was expected to climb to 50,000. More than 4 million people are homeless and 245,000 injured. China had declared a three-day mourning period that began Sunday. Movie theaters were closed, and television stations canceled most entertainment programs. The Olympic torch relay was suspended until Wednesday. Flags flew at half-staff. From Beijing's Tiananmen Square to Shanghai's Bund to the far-flung villages where rescue workers were still trying to dig out the living, everything simply came to a pause. Trains stopped on their tracks. Cars on roads encircling Beijing stopped. Drivers in unison leaned on their horns so a giant siren seemed to shriek. "We are so willing to share the suffering of the people of Sichuan, but except for donating this is the only thing we can do," said student Zhou Shuyang, 22, who joined thousands at Tiananmen Square. Despite the rising death toll, there were a few more remarkable rescues. At Chengdu, a 31-year-old man was pulled to safety today after he was trapped for more than a week in a flattened power plant near the epicenter of the quake. A miner was reported in stable condition today after his rescue Monday. A 50-year-old woman was rescued from the rubble of a residential building near a coal mine in Hanwang Township on Monday. In Beichuan County, a 61-year-old woman trapped in debris for about 145 hours was also saved, officials said. Information from Los Angeles Times and The New York Times is included in this report.Caption:  photoGetty Images : A woman holds a candle during a memorial at the Tianfu Square, as China began three days of national mourning for victims of the earthquake that occurred May 12.
