PADANG, Indonesia — Ratna Kurniasari Virgo lay surrounded by death for 40 hours, trapped with a broken leg between the collapsed walls of her college and the bodies of her friends. Her rescue Friday was a rare tale of survival two days after a 7.6-magnitude Indonesian earthquake killed at least 715 people and left nearly 3,000 missing under the rubble of tens of thousands of buildings. The wail of ambulances and the stench of decomposing bodies met volunteers from dozens of relief agencies Friday as they poured into the worst-hit area around the regional capital of Padang. Block after block of toppled hotels, hospitals, office buildings and schools had yet to be searched and dozens of unclaimed corpses were laid out in the sun at Dr. M. Djamil General Hospital, Padang's biggest, which was damaged in the quake. Meanwhile, an earthquake survivor trapped in a collapsed hotel in western Indonesia sent a text message saying he and some others were alive, triggering a frantic rescue operation early today. Wednesday's temblor devastated a stretch of more than 60 miles along the western coast of Sumatra island, prompting a massive international aid operation in a country where earthquakes have taken a huge human toll in recent years. The United Nations estimated the death toll from the quake could rise to 1,100. More than 20,000 houses and buildings were destroyed and 2,400 people hospitalized across seven districts, said Priyadi Kardono, a spokesman for the national disaster agency. Fuel was being rationed amid a power outage, water and food were in short supply and villagers dug out the dead with their bare hands, witnesses and aid agencies said. A rare rescue Contrasting that grim picture, Virgo, 19, an English-major sophomore, was found alive under the rubble of her college in Padang, the Foreign Language School of Prayoga. "Her dead friends were beneath and above her. Fortunately, she was able to withstand the stench for 40 hours," said Dubel Mereyenes, the doctor who treated her. "She has a severely injured leg, but we will try to avoid amputation." Another survivor was a teacher at the same school, Suci Ravika Wulan Sari, who was extracted from the debris almost exactly 48 hours after the college crumbled in the 5:16 p.m. quake, killing dozens of students. "She was conscious. Only her legs and fingers are swollen because she was squeezed," said the institute's director, Teresia Lianawaty. "Thank God! It is a miracle." Elsewhere in the city, at the site of the former Ambacang Hotel, where as many as 200 were feared trapped, rescue workers detected signs of life under a hill of tangled steel, concrete slabs and broken bricks of the five-story structure, said Gagah Prakosa, a spokesman of the rescue team. "We heard some voices of people under the rubble, but as you can see the damage is making it very difficult to extricate them," Prakosa said, as a backhoe cleared the debris. Military and commercial planes shuttled in tons of emergency supplies, although rural areas remained cut off from help due to landslides that reportedly destroyed several villages and killed nearly 300 people. Swiss teams sent in dogs to help search for survivors, but by nightfall had not found anymore alive. While the damage was most severe around Padang, a port city of 900,000, a reporter saw virtually no remaining structures in the rural, hilly district of Pariaman, a community of about 370,000 people about 50 miles north. Officials said more than 10,000 homes and buildings had been destroyed there. It was unclear how many died. At a makeshift center for the homeless, dozens took shelter under a 15-by-30 foot canopy donated by a local business. "We don't know where else to go," said Charlie, a local resident, who like many Indonesians uses a single name. "We need food and tents, but we haven't gotten any help yet." President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono told a crowd of people whose relatives are missing to "please be patient," assuring them the government was doing everything in its power to save lives. Millions of dollars in aid and financial assistance came from Australia, Britain, China, Germany, Japan, the European Union, Malaysia, the Netherlands, Singapore, South Korea, Switzerland, Denmark and the United States, Indonesian officials said. Samoa death toll Meanwhile, the death toll from Tuesday's earthquake and tsunami in Samoa and American Samoa rose to 170 Friday, including 129 in Samoa, 32 in American Samoa and nine in Tonga. Medical teams gave tetanus shots and antibiotics to survivors with infected wounds and survivors wore face masks to reduce the growing stench of rot. Some residents who fled to the hills after the disaster vowed never to return to their seaside villages. More headed to the hills after an aftershock shook the region. "It's a scary feeling, and a lot of them said they are not coming to the coastal area," Red Cross health coordinator Goretti Wulf said near the flattened village of Lalomanu on the south coast of Samoa's main island. "The lesson they learned has made them stay away." Also Powerful winds toppled power poles and trees early today in the northern Philippines as the second typhoon in eight days bore down on the country. Farther north, according to The AP, Taiwan began evacuating villages also in the path of the storm. The Philippines is still reeling from a Sept. 26 typhoon that caused the worst flooding in 40 years, killing 288 people. How to help THESE AID ORGANIZATIONS are accepting donations for their programs in Samoan islands and Sumatra: World Vision: 888-562-4453, www.worldvision.org Mercy Corps: 888-256-1900, www.mercycorps.org /asiapacificdisaster Uplift International: 206-985-9888 or www.upliftinternational.org. The Red Cross: 206-323-2345 or www.seattleredcross.org Registry: The Red Cross also encourages those who have been able to contact relatives in American Samoa to register their status in the Safe and Well program at https://disastersafe.redcross.org/. The program will provide other loved ones information on their well-being. — Laurie Dunlap, Times news assistantCaption:  photoWong Maye-E / The Associated Press: An Indonesian rescue team in Padang on Friday pulls out survivor Suci Ravika Wulan Sari, who was trapped in a school building for two days.
