HANWANG, China — In the 11 months since China's devastating May earthquake, Wang Tingzhang and his wife Liu Shengying have been transformed from docile, law-abiding citizens into defiant troublemakers, at least in the eyes of authorities. Along the way, they've been pushed, punched, wiretapped, followed and detained. Their offense? Asking too many questions about what happened to their only child, Wang Dan, an 18-year-old girl who was buried under the rubble of her high school in the May 12, 2008, earthquake here in Sichuan province. In the early weeks after the quake, Beijing was widely applauded for its efficiency, compassion and openness in handling China's worst natural disaster in decades. But since then, the curtain has fallen. Even the death toll is shrouded in secrecy. Although about 70,000 people are believed to have died, the government has yet to release an official toll. DNA testing that could identify thousands of victims has stalled with no explanation from authorities. The possibility that corruption might have been involved in the building of schools is the most politically sensitive aspect of the earthquake post-mortem. Parents and researchers asking about schools that collapsed have been detained and harassed. Tan Zuoren, a literary editor and environmentalist who was creating an archive of children killed in collapsing schools, was arrested last month on charges of subverting state authority, according to Amnesty International, which added that his dog was stabbed and his computer stolen in a pattern of harassment leading to his arrest. In the last few weeks, more than 10 volunteers working on a similar project with Ai Weiwei, a Beijing artist known for codesigning the "Bird's Nest" Olympic Stadium, have been detained while researching in Sichuan. Although all were released within a day, cameras, film and notebooks were confiscated. "Those in power view anybody asking questions as challenging the legitimacy of the government," said Ai, who has registered 5,000 names of the dead and is still counting. "In the case of my volunteers, you could say they deserved it ... . But for the parents, most of whom are peasants and ordinary people, to be followed, harassed, wiretapped, this is very scary for them." There's a growing clamor for an accounting of victims' names, ages and details of how they died so it can be determined if schools did collapse at a higher rate than other buildings. "If we bury the names of the dead, we cannot claim to have human rights in China," wrote the influential Southern Metropolis Daily in a hard-hitting editorial published Wednesday. Even the Chinese government pledged recently to register "the names of the people who died or disappeared in the earthquake and make them known to the public." To Wang Tingzhang, struggling the past 11 months to get information about his daughter, the Chinese government's promises sound hollow. Wang still goes regularly to the municipal offices to ask when DNA results might be available but says he's been brushed off. Until the earthquake, there was little to distinguish them from millions of other Chinese migrant workers. Although they both came from large peasant families, they were true believers in the Communist Party and its limitations on family size. Without complaint, they had just one child. "They pressure us. They try to control us. They follow us and listen to our phone calls," said Wang. "But even if they kill us, it doesn't matter because we've lost our daughter. ... We're not scared of the government anymore."Caption:  photoBarbara Demick / Los Angeles Times : Liu Shengying shows a photo of her 18-year-old daughter presumed dead in last year's earthquake in China.
