CIKANGKARENG, Indonesia — Rescuers dug through rocks and debris with their bare hands early today in search of dozens of villagers believed buried in a landslide triggered by a strong Indonesian earthquake that killed at least 46 people and damaged thousands of buildings. At least 110 people were hospitalized with injuries from the 7.0 magnitude quake off the coast of densely populated Java island, Disaster Management Agency spokesman Priyadi Kardono said, adding that 10 were in critical condition. The earthquake Wednesday caused destruction across West Java province, where more than 18,300 homes and offices were listed as damaged, around 9,000 of them seriously, Kardono said. At least 5,300 people were forced into temporary shelters, he said. Some rural areas could not be reached by telephone and there may be more victims and damage, officials said. Many of the deaths and injuries were caused by falling debris or collapsed walls and roofs. In the village of Cikangkareng, a landslide buried a row of homes under tons of rock and mud. At least 13 bodies were recovered and villagers were searching for dozens of people believed missing, Kardono said. "Everything is gone, my wife, my old father-in-law and my house ... now I just hope to find the bodies of my family," farmer Ahmad Suhana, 34, said as he pried at giant stones with a crowbar. Heavy digging equipment had not reached the remote village, which President Susilo Bambang Yudhoyono was to visit later today. Police, military personnel and villagers used their hands. Maskana Sumitra, a district administrator, said 11 houses and a mosque were buried by the landslide and estimated that more than 50 people were trapped and feared dead. "The chance of survival is so slim ... but we have to find them," Sumitra said. The prolonged shaking from the quake was felt hundreds of miles (kilometers) away on the neighboring resort island of Bali. In the capital, Jakarta, 125 miles (190 kilometers) north, thousands of panicked office workers flooded out of swaying skyscrapers onto the streets, some of them screaming. The Disaster Management Agency said at least 46 people were confirmed dead. A tsunami warning was issued after the quake struck at midafternoon but was lifted an hour later. Several dozen aftershocks were measured by geological agencies. Associated Press writers Ali Kotarumalos and Niniek Karmini in Jakarta contributed to this report.Caption:  photo, mapPikiran Rakyat Daily / The Associated Press: People stand by a house destroyed by an earthquake Wednesday in Tasikmalaya, West Java. Hospitals filled up with the injured after the quake off the south coast.The Associated Press: Magnitude-7.0 earthquake (GEE1L65TC)
