DAKAR, Senegal — Senegal offered free land Saturday to Haitians wishing to "return to their origins" after last week's 7.0-magnitude earthquake, which destroyed the capital and buried thousands of people beneath rubble. Senegal's octogenarian President Abdoulaye Wade told a meeting of his advisers that Haitians are the sons and daughters of Africa, because the country was founded by slaves, including some believed to have come from the West African nation. "The president is offering voluntary repatriation to any Haitian that wants to return to their origin," Wade's spokesman Mamadou Bemba Ndiaye said late Saturday after the president's announcement. "Senegal is ready to offer them parcels of land, even an entire region. It all depends on how many Haitians come." He stressed that Wade had insisted that if a region is handed over, it should be in a fertile area, not in the country's deserts. Senegal, a nation of 14 million, is considered one of the most stable and developed in the subregion. U.N. mission chief is found dead NEW YORK — U.N. officials said Saturday that the body of United Nations Haiti mission chief Hedi Annabi, of Tunisia, was found in the rubble of U.N. headquarters in Port-au-Prince, which collapsed in the earthquake. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon said the bodies of Annabi's deputy, Luiz Carlos da Costa, of Brazil, and the acting police commissioner, Doug Coates, of Canada, also were found. "In every sense of the word, they gave their lives for peace," Ban said. The United Nations said 40 members of the peacekeeping mission were confirmed dead and 188 more remained missing. Canada speeds immigration bids TORONTO — The Canadian government said it will expedite immigration applications from Haitians with relatives in Canada and give immigration priority to Haitians adversely affected by the earthquake. Immigration Minister Jason Kenney said Saturday that Haitians in Canada temporarily will be allowed to extend their stay. Canada will also prioritize pending adoption cases with the visa office in Port-au-Prince. Canada will open a satellite immigration office in the Dominican Republic to help facilitate the immigration process. Canada has more than 100,000 people of Haitian descent, most of whom live in Montreal. Fort Bragg troops hurry up and wait For a Fort Bragg unit heading to Haiti, it's hurry up and wait. At a lunch of pork chops and mashed potatoes at the chow hall in North Carolina, Navy Lt. Cmdr. Greg Meyer and one of his senior officers planned an afternoon treat for their roughly 30 troops after a day of waiting to leave: showers. He also gave his troops a departure update: "I have nothing. We're being patient." Nineteen minutes later things changed. The call came to get on the bus. Not long after, the troops with their gear and weapons were packed on a bus, headed to an airport hangar at Pope Air Force Base. And then came another delay. The crew that was going to fly the plane couldn't because it had reached the safety flying-time limit. A new crew would be required. Not to worry. "This is a minor delay in the big scheme of things," Meyer said. Seattle Times news servicesCaption:  photoAbdoulaye Wade
