LABADEE, Haiti — With the Celebrity Solstice cruise ship anchored just off the white-sand beach of the Labadee resort Friday, vacationers stretched out on beach chairs, sipped cold beer and piña coladas and listened to Haitian folk music. Labadee is 60 miles from Port-au-Prince, but it's a world away from the devastation of Port-au-Prince, where up to 200,000 people are believed dead after the Jan. 12 earthquake. The cruise ships have become the center of a controversy: Should vacationers relax and have fun with so much suffering nearby? Or would it be worse to halt the port calls and deprive locals of what they earn from tourism? Jameson Charitable, 20, stood near the pier with a sign offering tours. "Without this," he said, motioning toward the boat, "we don't eat." He said he makes $15 every time a ship comes in. About 200 people work at the resort, and a few hundred more vendors and service providers are allowed in whenever ships arrive. The resort enclave, which has a beach, a zip line in the mountains and other activities, is leased by the Haitian government to Royal Caribbean International, which also owns the Celebrity cruise line. Royal Caribbean President and Chief Executive Adam Goldstein said the decision to continue with scheduled stops in Labadee, which was not damaged in the quake, was easy. The country reaps a fixed cost per passenger, plus annual fees and the cash tourists spend on local goods at a marketplace where artisans and artists sell trinkets and crafts. Royal Caribbean is also donating $1 million, delivering food and water, and pledging net revenue from Labadee to the relief effort. Search team finds man alive PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti — An Israeli search team pulled a dehydrated 21-year-old man from the rubble of his bedroom 10 days after an earthquake leveled much of the Haitian capital. Doctors said Emmannuel Buso was in relatively good shape and is expected to make a full recovery. Buso said from his bed in an Israeli Defense Forces field hospital near Haiti's main airport that he survived by drinking his urine and spent most of his time under the debris in a listless daze, at times dreaming of his mother and thinking that he had, in fact, died. "I am here today because God wants it," Buso said. Earlier Friday, an 84-year-old woman was said by relatives to have been pulled from the wreckage of her home, according to doctors administering oxygen and intravenous fluids to her at the General Hospital. Doctors said she was in critical condition. The European Commission said international crews had rescued more than 125 people since the 7.0-magnitude earthquake struck Jan. 12, but successes have grown increasingly rare. Baby born on hospital ship Comfort PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti — In a day filled with moans and cries, broken bones and infected wounds, the Navy hospital ship Comfort got a surprise Thursday: a 4-pound, 5-ounce preemie named Esther. Her arrival seven weeks early in the Comfort's operating room marked a milestone. It's believed to be the first onboard delivery since the ship was converted to a floating hospital 22 years ago. The expectant mother arrived on the ship Wednesday with a piece of paper on her chest that said "open-book pelvic fracture." She also had a complex fracture of her right leg, and her amniotic sac had apparently ruptured when she was injured more than a week ago. "It's amazing that baby survived," said Lt. Cmdr. Susan Farrar, a physician from Portsmouth, Va., who delivered the child by cesarean section. Also Tax relief: Taxpayers will be able to write off charitable donations to Haiti earthquake-relief efforts when they file their 2009 taxes this spring under a bill President Obama signed Friday. The measure sped through Congress. Its intent is to encourage more donations. Seattle Times news servicesCaption:  photoLynne Sladky / The Associated Press : A passenger from the Celebrity Solstice cruise ship rides a zip line in Labadee, Haiti. The country reaps a fixed cost per passenger, plus annual fees and the cash tourists spend on local goods.
