JIEGU, China — Relatives kept alive a 4-year-old girl and an elderly woman trapped by an earthquake under a collapsed house for almost a week by using bamboo poles to push water and rice through the rubble until rescuers saved them. Wujian Cuomao, 68, and Cairen Baji, 4, were rescued from a crumbled home in a village 13 miles from the hardest-hit town of Jiegu. The rare good news came as the death toll in China's remote Tibetan region Yushu county in western Qinghai province rose to 2,046. More than 12,000 people were hurt, and 196 more remain missing. China announced a national day of mourning to be held Wednesday for victims of the devastating quake. National flags will fly at half-staff across the country and at overseas embassies and consulates, marking one week since the temblor hit, China's Cabinet announced Tuesday. All public entertainment will be suspended. By China's measure the quake was a magnitude 7.1, while the U.S. Geological Survey put it at 6.9. Relief efforts could be hindered by rain that was expected Tuesday on the high-altitude region. Sleet, wind, and light snow are forecast for the next three days, said Guo Yinxiang, spokeswoman for the Qinghai Metereological Bureau. In Jiegu, thousands of Tibetan Buddhist monks picked at rubble with shovels, performed funeral rites and threw food to survivors from the backs of trucks. The woman and child rescued in Jiegu had been protected by a wooden bed frame, which they huddled under as the house fell to pieces around them. Debris had pressed down on the girl's chest, CCTV said, but she suffered no injuries. The report said the woman's life was not in danger. A young woman CCTV said was a relative pointed to an 8-inch gap between the floor and a corner of the broken bed frame. "When the earthquake happened the house fell and they were buried under here," said the woman. "We sent them food every day." CCTV reported relatives used bamboo poles to push water and rice through the gap to the pair. Rescuers also freed a a Tibetan woman named Ritu from the rubble of a hillside house, state broadcaster China Central Television reported. Half her body had been trapped by debris, but her vital signs were stable.Caption:  photoThe Associated Press : A rescue worker holds Cairen Baji, 4, who was dug out from under a house, along with a woman, in Qinghai province. A third person was pulled from another home's rubble.
