MEXICALI, Mexico — A powerful earthquake rocked Mexico's Baja California peninsula Sunday, jolting millions of people from Los Angeles and San Diego to Phoenix and scattering destruction along the U.S.-Mexican border. Emergency services in both the United States and Mexico scrambled to assess the extent of casualties and damage, including fallen buildings, buckled roads, cracked water canals, fires and outages of telephone and electrical service. It appeared that most of the damage was in the twin border cities of Calexico, Calif., and Mexicali, Mexico. At least two people were reported killed in Mexico. Witnesses on both sides of the border reported feeling a strong, rolling series of shakes that unleashed panic in a dozen or more towns and cities. Families in the middle of Easter lunches were sent running for cover. "It's really ugly here," Olga Jimenez, 29, a water-company worker in Mexicali, said. "We felt a really big shake. The walls on houses fell down and people were running in the streets screaming." A new four-story parking garage at Mexicali's state-government headquarters partly collapsed, along with part of the city's courthouse, residents said. Patients were evacuated from the main hospital for fear of structural damage. Baja California state Civil Protection Director Alfredo Escobedo said a man was killed when his home collapsed just outside of Mexicali. He said the other man was killed when he panicked as the ground shook, ran into the street and was struck by a car. At least 100 people were injured, most of them struck by falling objects. At least 20 aftershocks were felt in the city, he said. "It has not stopped trembling in Mexicali," he said. Power was out in the city, and the blackout was expected to last at least 14 hours, Escobedo said. On Sunday night a flood of people began walking over the border from Mexicali into Calexico, after the crossing was closed to northbound vehicular traffic. People streamed across carrying babies and pushing suitcases and elderly relatives in wheelchairs. "It's a disaster over there," said Nayeli Ramirez, 17, after crossing into Calexico. "Buildings are tipped up. Cars are smashed. It's horrible. Everyone is running." Windows broken In Calexico's central older district, windows were broken and goods had tumbled off store shelves. By Sunday evening, some merchants were already sweeping up as inspectors red-tagged buildings to keep people out until damage surveys could be completed. The U.S. Geological Survey measured the magnitude of the quake at 7.2 — equal to the force that devastated the Haitian capital of Port au Prince in January. It hit at about 3:40 p.m. local time, lasted about 35 seconds and was followed 16 minutes later by a second 3.9 shaker near Borrego Springs, Calif., and, separately, a 4.1 temblor six miles southwest of Malibu, Calif., in the Pacific Ocean. This is the third major quake in this hemisphere in the last three months: In addition to the Haiti disaster, in which more than 200,000 people were killed, central and southern Chile were hit by one of the most powerful seismic events in history when an 8.8 quake struck Feb. 27, killing about 700 people. The epicenter of Sunday's main quake was near the Mexican town of Guadalupe Victoria, a wine-producing region about 30 miles south of Mexicali-Calexico and 220 miles southeast of Los Angeles. Bridges collapsed around the town, and concrete irrigation canals were damaged. At about six miles underground, it was a relatively shallow quake, which enhances the potential for devastation. In Mexicali, Calexico and even parts of San Diego County, electrical power failed, water was cut and gas leaks were reported. The Mexican federal electrical company said transmission lines from Tijuana, the Rosarita substation and the lines that connect Baja California to Imperial Valley, Calif., were all affected. In Los Angeles, seismologist Lucy Jones of the USGS said the fault involved in Sunday's quake was probably the Laguna Salada, which is about 43 miles long and straddles the California-Mexico border. Determining origin A magnitude-8.2 quake occurred on the same fault in 1890, Jones said, centered in a location north of Sunday's temblor. Geologists will observe the fault before making a definitive determination of the quake's origin, she added. The quake moved from the southeast toward the northwest, explaining why Southern California felt it so strongly. Occurring at the junction between the Pacific and North American tectonic plates that grind against each other in California and Baja California, the quake occurred on a "strike-slip" fault, which means the fault splices vertically through the Earth's crust, while the surface land moves horizontally. No significant damage or injuries were reported in Los Angeles. By far, it seemed the Mexican side of the border was hardest hit, suffering what Jones said was the strongest quake to hit the region in 18 years. Information from The Associated Press is included.Caption:  photo, mapThe Associated Press: 7.2-magnitude earthquake (GE21NCE9B)Sandy Huffaker / Getty Images : Workers clean up Sunday in Calexico, Calif., after a 7.2-magnitude earthquake struck the region.
