XINING, China — Rescuers combed through the rubble of collapsed buildings for survivors Thursday, more than a day after strong earthquakes shook a mountainous Tibetan region of China, killing more than 600 people and injuring thousands. The series of quakes flattened buildings in Qinghai Province's Yushu county, and sent survivors, many bleeding, flooding into the streets of Jiegu township. State television showed block after block of toppled mud and wood homes. Local officials said 85 percent of the buildings had been destroyed. Residents and troops garrisoned in the town used shovels and their hands to pull survivors and bodies from the rubble much of Wednesday. Several schools collapsed, with the state news agency saying at least 56 students died. Worst hit was the Yushu Vocational School, where the official Xinhua news agency cited a local education official as saying 22 students died. State broadcaster CCTV showed footage of rescuers working at night, picking through the rubble aided by torchlights fixed to their safety helmets. A group of workers found a girl trapped for more than 12 hours under a heap of debris. Crews set up emergency generators to restore operations at Yushu's airport, and by late afternoon the first of six flights landed, carrying rescue workers and equipment. But the road to town was blocked by a landslide, hampering the rescue as temperatures dropped below freezing. The death toll had risen to 617 by early Thursday, with more than 9,000 others injured, the Ministry of Civil Affairs said in a statement. About 15,000 houses had collapsed and 100,000 people need to be relocated, it said. The airport in Xining, the nearest big city at 530 miles away, was filled early Thursday with Chinese troops in camouflage, firefighters and rescue teams leading dozens of sniffer dogs. They were put on buses for the drive to the quake zone, which takes 12 hours in the best conditions. The area sits at about 13,000 feet and is poor. Most people live in Jiegu, with the remaining — mostly herders — scattered across the broad valleys. "The situation here is difficult. Most of the buildings have collapsed. A lot of people are seriously injured," said Pu Wu, a director of the Jinba Project, which provides health-care training for Tibetan communities. President Hu Jintao and Premier Wen Jiabao urged "all-out efforts" to rescue survivors. The government allocated $30 million for relief, and mobilized more than 5,000 soldiers, medical workers and other rescuers, joining 700 troops already on the ground. The initial quake was measured at magnitude-6.9 by the U.S. Geological Survey and 7.1 by the China Earthquake Networks Center. It hit Wednesday morning, local time, and was followed by a series of tremors. Residents of Jiegu, known by Tibetans as Gyegu, about 20 miles from the epicenter, fled dazed and sobbing as the ground shook. The destruction of schools is an eerie echo of the magnitude-7.9 quake that hit neighboring Sichuan province two years ago, leaving nearly 90,000 people dead or missing. Wednesday's quake and the one in Sichuan two years ago occurred along the Longmenshan Fault, which runs under the mountains that divide the Tibetan plateau to the west and the Sichuan plain below. Messages of sympathy came from U.S. Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton and the White House, the pope at the Vatican, U.N. Secretary-General Ban Ki-moon, and Tibet's exiled leader, the Dalai Lama. Houston Rockets basketball star Yao Ming set up a hotline to help North American Chinese residents reach family and friends in China. Once a trading hub and a gateway to central Tibet, Yushu and surrounding environs were among the Tibetan areas caught up in the anti-government protests that swept the region in March 2008. Tensions have simmered since, and the region has been closed to foreigners off and on.Caption:  photo, mapWang Qiang / The Associated Press: Soldiers carry a survivor rescued after a strong quake hit a mountainous Tibetan region of China. Soldiers and civilians used shovels and their bare hands to dig through collapsed buildings in search of survivors.The Associated Press: 6.9-magnitude quake (GTG1NFQPE)
