WASHINGTON — As U.S. donations began flooding into Haiti, the FBI and charity watchdogs warned potential donors to be cautious about where they send their money. Would-be donors should verify the legitimacy of groups seeking money and beware of spam attacks from people claiming to be raising money for earthquake-relief efforts, FBI officials said Thursday. After a tsunami devastated Southeast Asia in 2004, many people lost money by donating to relief organizations that turned out to be fraudulent. Specific tips from the FBI include: • Make contributions directly to known organizations, rather than relying on others to make the donation on your behalf, to ensure contributions are received and used for intended purposes. • Be skeptical of officials asking for donations via e-mail or social-networking sites. • Verify the legitimacy of nonprofit organizations, rather than following a purported link to the organization. • Do not give your personal or financial information to anyone who solicits contributions. Microsoft donates $1.25 million The Red Cross said it had collected nearly $35 million as of Thursday night, surpassing the amounts it received in the same time period after Hurricane Katrina and the Indian Ocean tsunami. Microsoft promised $1.25 million in cash and donations as well as technical support for relief groups in Haiti. Other companies lent a hand: Google pledged $1 million to UNICEF and other charitable organizations. Rush Limbaugh says don't donate WASHINGTON — The Obama administration fired back at Rush Limbaugh after the talk-radio host urged people not to donate to relief efforts in Haiti. Spokesman Robert Gibbs said there are always people who say "really stupid things" during a crisis. He said it's sad that Limbaugh would use his position to urge people not to assist those in need. Limbaugh said on his show Wednesday that he wouldn't trust that money donated to Haiti through the White House Web site would go to the relief efforts. He said Americans don't need to contribute to earthquake relief because they already donate to Haiti through their income taxes. Clooney, MTV planning telethon LOS ANGELES — MTV Networks is working with George Clooney to stage a telethon for Haitian earthquake relief. MTV spokesman Mark Jafar said Thursday that details were being worked out. There was no word yet about other stars getting involved. But Clooney representative Stan Rosenfield said the telethon likely would air Jan. 22 on all MTV Networks and ABC, NBC, HBO and CNN. White House raps Robertson remark VIRGINIA BEACH, Va. — A White House spokesman on Thursday slammed evangelist broadcaster Pat Robertson's remark that Haiti has been cursed. "It never ceases to amaze me that in times of amazing human suffering somebody says something that can be so utterly stupid," White House spokesman Robert Gibbs said. The day after the earthquake, Robertson said Haiti has been "cursed" because of what he called a "pact with the devil" in its history. His spokesman said the comments were based on Voodoo rituals carried out before a slave rebellion against French colonists in 1791. Spokesman Chris Roslan said Robertson never said the earthquake was God's wrath. Web site helps Haitians find others GENEVA — More than 5,000 people registered on a special Red Cross Web site a few hours after it was launched to help Haitians find loved ones missing in the earthquake, an official said Thursday. The quick response was aided by people spreading the link on social networks such as Facebook and Twitter, but also by the fact that many satellite Internet connections in the Caribbean nation appear to be working, said Marcal Izard, a spokesman for the International Committee of the Red Cross. Seattle Times news services
