When the shaking began just after 3:34 a.m. on Feb. 27, Andrew Bieniawski woke up with a start in his room on the 15th floor of the Sheraton Hotel in Santiago, Chile. A picture fell off the wall. He raced to the lobby. He had arrived from the United States just the day before to oversee a delicate operation that the U.S. government and Chile had been quietly setting up for more than a month, and now an earthquake was tearing apart the center of the country. The magnitude-8.8 quake killed 486 people, set off a tsunami, cracked buildings and roads, cut off electricity and phone lines, and spawned dozens of aftershocks. While the disaster unfolded, Bieniawski and his team from the Energy Department had another worry: They had packed 39.6 pounds of highly enriched uranium, enough to make a bomb, into a shipping container, ready for a secret evacuation by road to a port and then by sea to the United States. The quake threw up several new hurdles for the secret mission, and Bieniawski's first concern, he recalled, was this: Was the container damaged? Grabbing a phone before the lines went dead, he learned that the weapons-grade material was intact. But his team's problems had just begun. The Santiago operation put Bieniawski, associate deputy administrator for global threat reduction at the Energy Department's National Nuclear Security Administration (NNSA), on the front lines of an effort to clean out nuclear materials from reactors and other facilities around the world so that they will not fall into the hands of terrorists. At a summit in Washington on Monday and Tuesday, President Obama will press leaders or other representatives of 46 countries to accelerate such efforts and fulfill his pledge to lock up all the vulnerable material within four years. The clean-out operations are often risky. David Huizenga, associate deputy administrator of the NNSA, recalled one mission to move material from Bogotá, Colombia, to the coast at Cartagena. When guerrillas took over part of the territory, Huizenga and his team loaded their cargo aboard a rented Antonov plane and flew over the conflict on the ground. When the quake struck in Chile, Bieniawski also had to scramble. The materials, which were being removed in cooperation with the Chilean Commission of Nuclear Energy, included 30 pounds of highly enriched uranium from the La Reina Nuclear Center in downtown Santiago, about 9- pounds of slightly irradiated highly enriched uranium and a small amount of spent fuel from the Lo Aguirre Nuclear Center, 40 miles west of the city. Sarah Dickerson, a deputy director at the NNSA's Office of Former Soviet Union and Asian Threat Reduction, said the U.S. team that had gone ahead to prepare for the evacuation had cut the uranium rods into shorter pieces and had packed them into sealed casks, which were put in larger shipping containers. The containers, all told, weighed 50 tons and were ready for trucking to the port when the offshore quake hit. The epicenter was 200 miles from Santiago. After calling to check on the containers, Bieniawski learned that the port had been damaged, so a switch was made. The police checked to make sure the route was safe and the bridges intact. On Sunday, Bieniawski surveyed the route himself. Then some drivers balked because their homes and families had suffered in the quake, and the trip was delayed, he recalled. Finally, on March 2, the trucks pulled out. The uranium was taken by a specially outfitted double-hulled ship and arrived under U.S. Coast Guard escort in late March at the Charleston Weapons Station in South Carolina. Customs agents and nuclear inspectors measured for radiation in the vast cargo hold before clearing its crew. A massive crane then lifted out the containers and loaded them onto flatbed trucks adapted to safely handle the extra weight. Another radiation check, and they were off, bound for the Department of Energy's Savannah River Site in South Carolina and the Y-12 National Security Complex, the government's fortress-like HEU repository in Oak Ridge, Tenn. Chile's highly enriched uranium will remain radioactive for 5,000 more years, but much of it will be converted to safer fuel and resold for nuclear power. Bieniawski said South America now is free of highly enriched uranium, except for a small quantity in Argentina.Caption:  photoJorge Saenz / The Associated Press : Luis Manriquez lowers a transfer cylinder containing highly enriched uranium onto a forklift at a reactor in Santiago, Chile, in February.
