PISCO, Peru — It's been two years since Pisco was destroyed, two years since a 7.9-magnitude earthquake killed 596 people and reduced this gritty, poverty-ravaged fishing town to a maze of rubble and garbage and corpses. Thousands of rescuers, aid workers and government officials flocked to the area in the days just after the Aug. 15, 2007, quake. Millions of dollars in aid flowed in. Plans were quickly drawn up to help survivors, put up tens of thousands of earthquake-resistant homes and rebuild the main regional hospital. Pisco, they said, would be built anew. They were wrong. The world is full of good intentions in the days after a disaster, when footage of crying parents fills television screens and aid workers rush in to help. That's the case right now with Haiti. Today, many of the streets of Pisco are still full of rubble. Thousands of survivors still live in shacks. Thousands more have left. That new hospital? Construction hasn't even begun. "The state has forgotten us," said Medalit Diaz, 33, who lives in a huddle of makeshift huts and tents next to the town's soccer stadium. Diaz, an out-of-work maid who lives with her sister, brother, father, two daughters and niece in a one-room shack, said it was initially a shock to live as a squatter. "Little by little you get used to it, but it's still hard." A different story But if life is difficult in Pisco, the story is different in Banda Aceh, the Indonesian town devastated by the 2004 tsunami. Entire blocks of the town simply disappeared; boats were tossed far inland. It took months just to find all the corpses. In all, about 230,000 people died in a swath from Indonesia to Thailand, India and Sri Lanka. More than half of the dead were in Aceh province. The first weeks, certainly, were chaos as aid workers, many ill-prepared for the scale of the destruction, struggled to help. Within a few months, though, things had become far more organized. One year after the tsunami, carefully planned reconstruction projects were well under way. Today, five years since the disaster, it can be difficult to see that something terrible happened here. Banda Aceh is crisscrossed by well-paved roads, new earthquake-resistant houses and modern schools and clinics. There are comfortable orphanages and therapists to help survivors cope with post-traumatic stress. There are workshops to train people for jobs. In all, donors gave more than $13 billion in the tsunami's aftermath. Nearly half of that went to Aceh. If the reconstruction effort cannot end the grief, it has helped immensely. "It's amazing, the support we received," said H. Tu Bulquaini, the director of Markaz Al-Islah, a small Banda Aceh boarding school and orphanage. Donors "gave us more than enough aid." Perhaps even more importantly, the agencies made clear they would do all they could to keep Banda Aceh functioning in the aftermath of the disaster. "They not only gave us money, they cared about us. The children could feel it. People came and paid attention to us," he said. "How could we ever repay them?" More often, the world's attention remains focused — or fades — in ways that are far less clear. In Bangladesh, for instance, a seemingly endless series of natural calamities means it is difficult to get attention when the country is hit by yet another cyclone or flood. In Myanmar, where a 2008 cyclone killed nearly 140,000 people, the secretive military regime initially denied aid agencies access, only relenting after global condemnation.
