PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti — Christian and Voodoo leaders put aside their differences for a moment Friday, joining hands under a canopy of tropical trees as earthquake survivors, some on crutches or in wheelchairs, mourned the more than 200,000 Haitians killed by the Jan. 12 earthquake. The catastrophe has driven a wedge between Haiti's religions as Christian groups make inroads among shaken Voodoo followers, some drawn by the steady flow of aid through evangelical missions and others frightened by a disaster they saw as a warning from God. "People see rice being distributed in front of churches and those homeless now needing papers are being offered baptism certificates that can act as identity documents," Voodoo priest Max Beauvoir said before speaking at Friday's service. "The horrible thing though is that by rejecting Voodoo, these people are rejecting their ancestors and history. Voodoo is the soul of the Haitian people. Without it, the people are lost." Beauvoir said it took weeks of negotiations to arrange his participation in Friday's ceremony, and some didn't want Voodoo represented in Port-au-Prince on Friday's national day of mourning. Haitians gathered under the shade of mimosa and powderpuff trees and flooded the streets of the capital in prayer, climbing atop the rubble of destroyed churches and spilling into parks, where they stretched their arms to the skies. Hymns reverberated throughout the shattered city. President René Préval broke down in tears, wiping his eyes with a handkerchief as his wife tried to console him. "The pain is too heavy, words cannot describe it," he said in one of the first major public addresses he has made in weeks. After the quake, evangelical U.S. broadcaster Pat Robertson said Haiti had been cursed after its slave founders made a "pact with the devil." Some Haitians wonder if God may be angry for their close ties to the spirit world. "The earthquake scared me," said Veronique Malot, 24, who joined an evangelical church two weeks ago when she found herself living in one of the city's many outdoor camps. "Voodoo has been in my family, but the government isn't helping us. The only people giving aid are the Christian churches." Christians have organized international disaster relief in Haiti and the rest of the developing world for decades. Baptists, Catholics, Jehovah's Witnesses, Scientologists, Mormons and other missionaries have flocked to Haiti in droves since the earthquake, feeding the homeless, treating the injured and preaching the Gospel in squalid camps where some 1 million people now live. Many missionaries who have flocked to the country since the earthquake say their goals in Haiti are strictly humanitarian. "We're not here to practice our religion," said Chris Hermensen, a Mormon nurse. "We're here to help right now." In a sign of a return to normality, meanwhile, officials said Friday that commercial-passenger flights would resume at Haiti's international airport Feb. 19. About Voodoo Voodoo, or Vodou as preferred by Haitians, evolved in the 17th century, when the French brought slaves to Haiti from West Africa. Slaves forced to practice Catholicism remained loyal to their African spirits in secret by adopting Catholic saints to coincide with African spirits, and today many Haitians consider themselves followers of both religions. Voodoo's followers believe in reincarnation, one God and a pantheon of spirits. Voodoo leaders say that although they do not believe in evil spirits, some followers pray for the spirits to do evil. Voodoo became recognized as a formal religion in Haiti in 1987. The Associated PressCaption:  photoSophia Paris / Minustah via Getty Images: At a ceremony Friday, Haitians pray in Port-au-Prince for the approximately 200,000 people who died in the earthquake that struck Jan. 12.
