PORT-AU-PRINCE, Haiti — The biggest U.S. military surge since Iraq and Afghanistan is scaling back a month after the troops arrived in haste to aid victims of Haiti's catastrophic quake. Defense Secretary Robert Gates says the U.S. will be in Haiti for the long haul, although troop strength is down to 13,000 from a Feb. 1 peak of 20,000. U.S. forces have provided some of the most visible support to a nation whose government and infrastructure were nearly wiped out in less than a minute on Jan. 12. They have shored up the capital's quake-damaged port to operate at several times its pre-quake tonnage, while acting as a security and logistics mainstay for U.N. food distributions. Military choppers have delivered relief to isolated villages. The flow of injured quake victims to the USNS Comfort hospital ship has eased, but the need for medical facilities remains overwhelming in Port-au-Prince. "We're pretty saturated. This is the chokepoint," said Air Force Maj. John Mansuy of St. Clairsville, Ohio, the operating-room nurse in a tented, full-service unit with zipper doors and a positive air flow to keep out choking dust from a landfill in the teeming Cite Soleil slum. The Haiti aid operation, which is costing the Pentagon $234 million and counting, has added a new strain to an already overtaxed military. About seven in 10 of the Cite Soleil's modern-day MASH unit's members are veterans of the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan — and many are scheduled to return there. U.S. Southern Command chief Gen. Douglas Fraser would not specify during a weekend visit what U.S. troop levels would be in the coming months. "Remember that the capability and the capacity the United States military brought in was for immediate relief," he told reporters. The U.S. military already is turning certain tasks back over to the Haitians, such as daytime air traffic control at Port-au-Prince's damaged international airport, where commercial flights are expected to resume by Friday. The Haitians have generally welcomed the U.S. military, which has a long history of involvement in Haiti. A Marine-led occupation from 1915 to 1934 is widely seen as a high-water mark of U.S. intervention. Troops returned repeatedly, paving the way in 1994 for President Jean-Bertrand Aristide's return to power — and then quelling widespread violence in 2004 after Aristide flew into exile aboard a U.S. plane. Some now regard as heavy handed the emphasis on security after the earthquake, even though the tremor emptied the Port-au-Prince jail. "The foreign countries that came to our aid fell victim to their own propaganda," said Patrick Elie, a former Haitian defense minister tasked by President Rene Preval with heading a commission on restructuring the country's dismantled security forces. "They were afraid of a monster that never existed except in their own fantasies ... that Haitians are bloodthirsty savages." After the disaster, there were isolated street fights and killings of looters by security guards, and some gang violence in slums driven by leaders who escaped from prison. But the capital has been largely calm and orderly as Haitians organize themselves from the ground up.
