Strength of Japan quake now 9.0 LOS ANGELES — The U.S. Geological Survey has upgraded the magnitude of Friday's deadly earthquake in Japan to 9.0 The move Monday comes after Japan's Meteorological Agency did the same. It's not unusual for scientists to tweak the magnitude of a giant quake after some number-crunching. U.S. government scientists originally put the Japan quake at 8.9. The change to 9.0 means the quake was about 1.5 times stronger than initially thought. The Japan quake is now the fourth largest in the world since 1900 behind the 2004 magnitude-9.1 Sumatra quake. Boeing supplies for Dreamliner OK Boeing, which relies on Japanese suppliers to build 35 percent of its 787 Dreamliner, has enough stock to keep production steady for weeks as its partners assess the impact of last week's earthquake. "We're OK for a few weeks, and I can't tell you beyond that," Boeing Commercial Airplanes President Jim Albaugh said in Scottsdale, Ariz. He should know more details about the situation later today, he said. "We don't want to be alarmist." Power and infrastructure, which affect whether employees get to work and goods are transported, are the biggest concerns for keeping factories open in Japan after the earthquake and tsunami, Albaugh said. Japanese companies designed and supply 35 percent of the structure of Chicago-based Boeing's new 787, which is three years behind schedule. Mitsubishi Heavy Industries makes the wings and Kawasaki Heavy Industries and Fuji Heavy Industries build part of the front fuselage section and center wing boxes. The three Japanese contractors also supply 20 percent of the parts for Boeing's 777 and 15 percent on the 767. Those companies have their main operations in Nagoya, in southern Japan. 2 killed in Costco parking garage Costco Wholesale said two people died when a parking garage collapsed at its warehouse in Tamasakai during the earthquake that crippled Japan. The store sustained significant damage and will remain closed for several months for inspections and repairs. The people who died were not Costco employees, who have all been accounted for and are safe. Costco's other eight warehouses and a distribution facility in Japan have been inspected and reopened. The Issaquah-based company is taking donations at its checkout counters for the Red Cross/Red Crescent Relief Fund to assist in relief efforts in Japan. Meanwhile, Starbucks said that, as of Saturday, 100 of its 900 stores in Japan were still closed. Most of the open stores were receiving supplies regularly. All the people who were working at Starbucks stores in Japan during the quake are safe, the coffee-shop chain said. Galapagos to get 6 tons of relief QUITO, Ecuador — The Ecuadorean government has sent 6 tons of food and water to the Galapagos after the islands were hit by a tsunami from the Japanese earthquake. Ecuador's national emergency department says it shipped the aid Monday to 260 families on Santa Cruz and San Cristóbal islands whose fishing boats — and livelihood — were destroyed. Water from the tsunami penetrated up to a third of a mile inland in the Galapagos, causing minor damage to homes and docks, merging a lagoon with the sea and destroying some endangered tortoise nests. The islands are about 620 miles off Ecuador in the Pacific Ocean. They are home to unique animal species that inspired Charles Darwin's ideas on evolution. Voice of Aflac duck fired over tweets COLUMBUS, Ga. — Aflac said Monday it has fired Gilbert Gottfried, the abrasive voice of the insurer's quacking duck in the United States, after the comedian posted a string of mocking jokes about the earthquake and tsunami in Japan on Twitter over the weekend. The tasteless tweets are particularly problematic for Aflac because it does 75 percent of its business in Japan. One in four homes in Japan buys health insurance from Aflac. The insurer's CEO, Daniel Amos, flew to Japan on Sunday to show support for the company's employees and agents. One of the tweets read: "I was talking to my Japanese real estate agent. I said 'is there a school in this area.' She said 'not now, but just wait.' " Seattle Times staff and news servicesCaption:  photoYomiuri Shimbun / AFP / Getty Images: A soldier on Monday holds a 4-month-old baby who survived the tsunami with her family at Ishinomaki city in Miyagi prefecture.
