WASHINGTON — Last week's East Coast earthquake jolted huge concrete containers holding spent nuclear fuel at the North Anna power plant, about 115 miles southwest of Washington, shifting some containers 1 to 4 inches, said the plant's operator, Dominion Virginia Power. The containers, called casks, weigh 115 tons each and are filled with bundles of uranium-dioxide fuel rods that no longer generate enough heat to produce electricity. The plant in central Virginia houses a total of 53 casks on two concrete pads. Of 27 casks on one pad, 25 shifted during the magnitude-5.8 earthquake that struck Aug. 23 in Mineral, about 12 miles south of the plant in Louisa County, Dominion spokesman Richard Zuercher said. "They are safe and remain intact," Zuercher said. "They are designed not to fall over, and they didn't fall over." Sensors designed to detect leaks of helium, which fill the casks, indicated no leaks, he added. More than 20 aftershocks, ranging from 4.5 to 1.8, followed last week's quake, including one Thursday with a magnitude of 3.4. The power plant's casks, which look like concrete silos, sit on two secure pads outside the two-reactor power plant, which remains closed pending inspections by a team sent by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) this week. Each of the 27 casks on one pad is at capacity, holding 32 fuel rods. On a second storage pad, 26 newer storage casks did not shift, Zuercher said. Some concrete flaked off the outside of these newer casks, which sit horizontally instead of vertically like the older casks. Thirteen of those casks hold fuel; the rest are empty. "This indicates that reactors that have these dry casks in these earthquake-prone areas, they're going to have to do more to protect them from ground motion," said Robert Alvarez from the Institute for Policy Studies, who has extensively studied nuclear-waste storage. "One thing is to bolt them to the pads. And that's not a Home Depot-type job. The pads themselves also need to be examined to see if they're durable enough." Zuercher said Dominion continues its own inspections alongside the NRC team. "We have not found anything significant, nothing that affects nuclear safety," he said. "Both units are offline and in cold shutdown." Dominion notified the NRC last Friday that the earthquake may have shaken the facility more than it was designed to handle. After an analysis of "shake plates" that record ground motion, Zuercher said, the company will make a final determination on whether the ground motion exceeded the plant's design. As at many U.S. nuclear plants, when fuel rods at North Anna lose power, they are moved to an indoor spent-fuel pool. After cooling there for several years, workers move the rods to the so-called dry storage casks, which are outdoors and cooled by natural air circulation. Fuel rods remain radioactive for thousands of years as they slowly decay. Dry casks were designed as temporary storage, Alvarez said, but have become de facto long-term waste warehouses as the country has failed to build a permanent waste repository. Starting in 1986, the federal government began planning to move the nation's nuclear waste to a permanent repository at Yucca Mountain in Nevada. But after President Obama took office in 2009, he defunded the partially built hole in the mountain and declared the project closed. Lawsuits arguing for and against completing Yucca Mountain are in the federal courts. 4.2 earthquake hits L.A. area A magnitude-4.2 earthquake and aftershocks rattled the Los Angeles region Thursday, but there were no immediate reports of damage. The quake hit at 1:47 p.m. and was centered 24 miles northwest of downtown Los Angeles. It was followed by six aftershocks up to magnitude 3. — The Associated PressCaption:  photoJohn Mcdonnell / The Washington Post: Huge concrete containers holding spent nuclear fuel at the North Anna power plant in Virginia were shifted from 1 to 4 inches.
