6.1 quake hits close to Japan's Mount Fuji TOKYO — A 6.1-magnitude earthquake struck close to Japan's Mount Fuji on Tuesday, about 55 miles southwest of Tokyo, according to the U.S. Geological Survey Earlier an aftershock measuring 6.2 struck off the coast of Fukushima prefecture, 200 miles northeast of Tokyo. Scientists said Tuesday they were worried that Friday's magnitude 9.0 temblor might trigger a dangerous earthquake close to Tokyo, the largest urban center in the world. The fear is that the initial quake and the series of large aftershocks that follow will transfer geophysical stresses into nearby faults, causing some near Tokyo to shift violently, said Michael Wysession, a seismologist at Washington University, St. Louis. Tokyo is situated at what's known as a "triple junction," a place where three tectonic plates — the Pacific, the Philippine and the Eurasian plates — come together. Tsunami drowns thousands of seabirds HONOLULU — Thousands of seabirds were killed when the tsunami generated by last week's massive earthquake off Japan flooded Midway, a remote atoll northwest of the main Hawaiian islands, a federal wildlife official said Tuesday. At least 1,000 adult and adolescent Laysan albatross were killed, along with thousands of chicks, said Barry Stieglitz, the project leader for the Hawaiian and Pacific Islands National Wildlife Refuges. Many drowned or were buried under debris as waves reaching 5 feet high rolled over the low-lying atoll about four hours after the magnitude-9.0 earthquake struck Friday. Stieglitz said the deaths could account for a significant share of Laysan albatross chicks hatched during the current season. Nuclear worries reroute flights PARIS — Citing concerns about potential disruptions to air traffic because of the nuclear crisis in Japan, Lufthansa said Tuesday that it had begun rerouting its Tokyo flights southwest to airports in Nagoya and Osaka. Some other European airlines, including Air France and Swiss International Air Lines, have added stopovers to direct flights so crew members do not have to stay overnight in Tokyo, the capital. Spokesmen for the three U.S. airlines with the most traffic across the Pacific — United Continental Holding, Delta Air Lines and American Airlines — told Bloomberg News that they had not changed flight plans. Website post of death a hoax OFUNATO, Japan — For several hours, Ashley Russell thought his daughter was dead. A missing-persons website set up to track Japan's tsunami said so. The Australian father eventually discovered that the post was a hoax and his daughter, Alice Byron, is safe. Sydney-based Russell, 48, told of his distress Tuesday after finding a message on the Google site Saturday afternoon saying the 21-year-old woman had been confirmed dead at a hospital in the devastated coastal town of Ofunato, where she had been teaching English for nine months. Her father said frantic friends in Japan were able to telephone the hospital and confirm the deception. "There are some evil people out there," said Russell. Also Seattle Buddhist Temple will hold the first in a series of memorial services for earthquake and tsunami victims Friday afternoon. Between 4 p.m. and 6 p.m., the public is invited to ring the temple bell in memory of the victims. At 6 p.m., the temple will hold a seventh-day memorial, which expresses the disaster victims' spiritual oneness with Buddha. The temple is at 1427 S. Main St., Seattle. Seattle Times staff and wire services
