IAEA chief will tour quake site, says crisis 'extremely serious' YAMAGATA, Japan — The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) chief says he views Japan's nuclear crisis as an extremely serious accident requiring international cooperation. IAEA chief Yukiya Amano said Friday that he plans to meet with top Japanese officials and to visit the area struck by the 9.0 earthquake and tsunami a week ago that knocked out power for the cooling systems at a nuclear-power plant, setting off Japan's crisis. Amano is accompanied by a four-member team of experts. He said: "We see it as an extremely serious accident. The international community is extremely concerned about this issue, and it's important to cooperate in dealing with it." Hawaii expects tourism drop A tsunami spawned by the deadly earthquake in Japan caused tens of millions of dollars in damage to homes, businesses and boats in Hawaii after the waves roared ashore last week. Now the islands are bracing for another hit: a loss in travelers from Japan. Gov. Neil Abercrombie predicted the economic consequences will be severe for the tourism-dependent state that is already dealing with a projected shortfall of nearly $1 billion over the next two years. "It's going to be terrible," he said. Hawaii is the top U.S. destination for the Japanese. Visitors from Japan poured about $1.9 billion into Hawaii in 2010, or about 17 percent of the $11.4 billion overall visitor revenue. China on edge over radiation risk China urged Japan on Thursday to report any developments in its nuclear crisis quickly and accurately as concern spread over whether officials in Tokyo had played down the scope of the radiation risk. Those concerns led Chinese across the country to empty supermarkets of iodized salt, even though government health officials warned that ingesting it would not protect people exposed to radiation. At a regular news briefing, Jiang Yu, the Foreign Ministry spokeswoman, said, "We hope that Japan reports details to the world in a timely and accurate manner." The China Meteorological Administration reported Thursday that the wind was sweeping radioactive pollutants from Japan's crippled nuclear plant toward the southeast. China should not be affected for the next three days, the agency said. GM suspends work at Louisiana plant General Motors is suspending production of Chevrolet Colorado and GMC Canyon pickups at a factory in Shreveport, La., for at least one week starting Monday because of a shortage of parts coming from Japan. About 900 employees work at the plant. The workers will file for state unemployment benefits and will receive some supplemental pay from GM that will bring their income to about 70 percent of their regular wages, according to the automaker. All of the major Japanese automakers have suspended production in Japan because of the earthquake and tsunami that hit the island nation last week. But GM's closure was the first indication that damage to the auto-parts supply chain would affect production in the United States. Asia drops fresh Japanese sushi Sushi restaurants are dropping Japanese fresh food from their menus as a radiation plume released by the country's damaged nuclear plant heightened fears over possible radioactive contamination. "Our guests' safety is our top priority," said Sari Yong, a spokeswoman for Shangri-La Asia. "As a precaution, we have temporarily stopped importing fresh food from Japan." The Mandarin Oriental International's flagship in Hong Kong and the city's Four Seasons Hotel have stopped buying food from Japan even as experts say the health risks haven't been established. Seattle Times news services
