GAUHATI, India — Rescue workers used shovels and their bare hands to pull bodies from the debris of collapsed buildings Monday, as the death toll from an earthquake that hit northeast India, Nepal and Tibet rose to 50. At least 25 people died in the northeastern Indian state of Sikkim after the 6.9 magnitude quake hit the region Sunday evening, police said. Paramilitary soldiers had pulled out 18 bodies and had located seven others buried under mounds of concrete in Gangtok, Sikkim's capital, police Chief Jasbir Singh said. Another 11 people were killed in the neighboring Indian states of Bihar and West Bengal. Seven people died in Nepal, and China's official Xinhua news agency reported seven deaths from Tibet. Most of the deaths occurred when houses, already weakened from recent monsoon rains, collapsed from the force of the quake, which was centered in Sikkim near India's border with Nepal. Heavy rains and landslides hampered rescue workers as they worked through the night to pull people from under the rubble, Singh said. Much of the damage was not immediately known because the region is remote and sparsely populated. TV stations reported buildings buckled, sidewalks cracked and two major roads collapsed in Sikkim's state capital of Gangtok, 42 miles southeast of the quake's epicenter. Power lines snapped in the West Bengal cities of Darjeeling and Kalimpong, which "are now in total darkness," state Chief Minister Mamata Banerjee said, according to Press Trust of India. Prime Minister Manmohan Singh offered to send troops to help, and summoned the National Disaster Management Authority for an emergency meeting. The air force sent five planes to help with rescue efforts. The region has been hit by major quakes in the past, including in 1950 and 1897. In neighboring Nepal and Bangladesh, the quake Sunday night sent residents rushing out of their homes, offices and shopping centers. In Katmandu, members of parliament who were debating the national budget ran out of the assembly hall into a parking area. They returned 15 minutes later and resumed their session. The quake was also felt as far as the Indian capital, with New Delhi residents also rushing out of shaking buildings.Caption:  mapThe Associated Press: India (GTL1SLHQQ)
