WASHINGTON — The Washington Monument will continue to be off-limits to visitors in the wake of last month's damaging earthquake, officials said Monday. But there's still plenty to see. Beginning at 8 a.m. Tuesday, mountain climbers will rappel down each of the monument's four sides simultaneously to examine the extent of the damage sustained by the landmark. That's the only way authorities can get a detailed look at the exterior of the monument, which stands a little more than 555 feet tall. "The good news is that it is structurally sound," Bob Vogel, superintendent of the National Mall and Memorial Parks, said at a news conference Monday. "The original architects knew what they were doing." Brandon Latham, a mountaineering and rope-rigging ranger from Denali National Park in Alaska, will lead the mountain climbers' slow-and-careful "expedition" down the sides of the monument. The monument's elevator system was damaged in the magnitude-5.8 earthquake that rocked much of the East Coast on Aug. 23. Several of the monument's exterior tiles also cracked. All damage seems to be in the top 100 feet of the monument. The Park Service posted on its website a video taken from a security camera in the observation deck near the top during the quake. The video shows debris falling from the ceiling, the entire structure shaking violently, and terrified visitors falling and running for safety. Jennifer Talken-Spaulding, a National Park Service ranger, recalled touring the damaged areas shortly after the earthquake: "When I walked up and saw daylight coming through the cracks at the top, it just broke my heart," she said during the news conference. Since the earthquake, rangers have been using a foamlike filler and caulk to try to minimize water seeping in through cracks in the monument's mortar that are up to one-quarter-inch wide. The Washington Monument is both the world's tallest stone monument as well as the world's tallest obelisk, and is considered a must-see for visitors to the nation's capital. Visitors normally can take a 70-second elevator ride to the observation deck 500 feet above the National Mall. Vogel said the worst damage happened in the pyramidium, the pyramid-shaped top of the structure. "Daylight is visible at a number of the vertical joints where mortar is missing," he said. As a result, a substantial amount of water has been getting into the monument, which could cause more damage. Dan Gach, 35, one of the rappelling engineers, said each engineer will take one side. He said the team has a detailed description of each stone, which was compiled during the 1999 rehabilitation project. The engineers have drawings of each of the marble exterior stones so they can compare its 1999 condition with the present one, Gach said. Each stone is numbered. The engineers also have small hammers they can use to test the soundness of the stones, he said. "You can tap it lightly and the stone density will make a definitive sound," he said. When you tap a weak spot, "that area will just sound dead." The team will use strong, specially coated nylon rope, and a supervisor will use a meter to monitor the wind velocity, he said. Winds of 25 mph are considered unsafe. Vogel said the team will climb out the windows near the top of the monument, maneuver with ropes up to the peak and then work its way down. The climbers will remove any loose material if they can do so safely and by hand, Vogel said. Weatherization of the open cracks will take place after that, he said. After the earthquake, some damage was linked to the soft mortar inserted between stones during a renovation that began in 1999. That mortar was designed to crumble, to give the structure flexibility, the Park Service has said. Repairs were made on some cracks after Hurricane Irene, and puddles were found inside the monument. Experts wondered where there were more, undetected cracks. The puddles were discovered in stairwells above the 400-foot level. The 555-foot-tall white marble monument was completed in 1884 and had never been damaged previously by a natural disaster, including a stronger earthquake in 1897. The tallest structure in the world at the time, it's still the tallest in Washington. The Aug. 23 earthquake was centered just outside Mineral, Va., and was felt from the Carolinas to Boston and beyond. It also damaged Washington's National Cathedral, although it remains structurally sound. Several spires and decorative elements on the edifice were either damaged or snapped off.Caption:  photoChip Somodevilla / Getty Images: The Washington Monument was indefinitely closed Aug. 23 after a magnitude-5.8 earthquake centered in nearby Virginia struck.
