TOYKO — A magnitude 8.9 earthquake slammed Japan's northeastern coast Friday, unleashing a 13-foot tsunami that swept boats, cars, buildings and tons of debris miles inland. Fires triggered by the quake burned out of control up and down the coast. At least six people were killed, 20 injured and many were missing, including a number of children who were sucked into the sea, the public broadcaster NHK reported. The six deaths were reported at a welfare facility that collapsed in Minami Soma in Fukushima Prefecture, and the Kyodo News agency said eight people were missing in a landslide there. There were reports of several injuries in Tokyo, hundreds of miles away, where buildings shook violently through the main quake and the wave of massive aftershocks that followed. A tsunami warning was issued for dozens of Pacific countries, as far away as Chile. Japan's meteorological agency said that within two hours, large tsunamis washed ashore into dozens of cities along a 1,300-mile stretch of the country's eastern shore — from the northern island of Hokkaido to central Wakayama Prefecture. Prime Minister Naoto Kan said the quake caused "major damage in broad areas" but nuclear power plants in the area were not affected. The government prepared to send troops to the quake-hit areas. "This is a rare major quake, and damages could quickly rise by the minute," said Junichi Sawada, an official with Japan's Fire and Disaster Management Agency. TV footage showed waves of muddy waters sweeping over farmland near Sendai, carrying buildings, some on fire, inland as cars attempted to drive away. Sendai Airport, north of Tokyo, was inundated with cars, trucks, buses and thick mud deposited over its runways. Fires spread through a section of the city, NHK reported. Elsewhere, fishing boats lay upturned on land, some distance from the sea. A fire erupted at the Cosmo oil refinery in Ichihara city in Chiba Prefecture near Tokyo and was burning out of control. Dozens of fires were also reported in northern prefectures of Fukushima, Sendai, Iwate and Ibaraki. Tokyo's Narita Airport shut down, Kyodo News reported. Haneda, the capital's other main airport, was also closed, NHK said. Toyko subway and train services were halted as were Toyko commuter and bullet-train operations. Power plants also were shut down. "It felt like a jet had come too close to the window and everything started shaking and rocking, and there was a huge rumbling noise. All the signs started swaying and fixtures started popping out," said David Pierson, a 32-year-old U.S. Army helicopter pilot who was at Tokyo's Narita Airport. "When I saw the panic on people's faces, I made a move for the exit." The quake struck at 2:46 p.m. and was followed by five powerful aftershocks within about an hour, the strongest measuring 7.1. The U.S. Geological Survey upgraded the strength of the first quake to a magnitude 8.9, while Japan's meteorological agency measured it at 8.4. The meteorological agency issued a tsunami warning for the entire Pacific coast of Japan. NHK was warning those near the coast to get to safer ground. The Pacific Tsunami Warning Center in Hawaii said a tsunami warning was in effect for Japan, Russia, Marcus Island and the Northern Marianas. It later widened its tsunami warning to include Hawaii and the rest of the Pacific Ocean. That includes Australia, New Zealand, Mexico and Central and South America. The coast of North America is not included in the warning. A tsunami watch was issued for Guam, Taiwan, the Philippines and Indonesia. The quake struck at a depth of six miles, about 80 miles off the eastern coast, the agency said. The area is 240 miles northeast of Tokyo. In downtown Tokyo, large buildings shook and workers poured into the street for safety. TV footage showed a large building on fire and bellowing smoke in the Odaiba district of Tokyo. The ceiling in Kudan Kaikan, a large hall in Tokyo, collapsed. A tsunami watch was issued for coastal areas of Washington, Oregon, British Columbia an California, according to the National Weather Service forecast office. A tsunami watch is "advance notice to areas that could be impacted by a tsunami at a later time," according to the Weather Service, which says people in areas under a watch should "stay alert for supplemental information." There is a small chance of a tsunami of a few feet on Washington's coast, according to John Vidale, director of the Pacific Northwest Seismic Network, which operates from The University of Washington in Seattle. Just before midnight Thursday, he said he was surprised there hadn't been a tsunami warning issued for the Washington coast already and said there could be one by morning. However, a tsunami of a few feet poses little danger, he said, and if it were to happen, "there certainly wouldn't be any danger in Seattle." The swell would not travel much up the Strait of Juan de Fuca, he said. Vidale said the Japan quake was too distant from the Cascadia Subduction Zone under the Washington coast to trigger a quake here. Information from Bloomberg News and Los Angeles Times and The Seattle Times staff is included in this report.Caption:  photoThe Associated Press: This image from Japan's NHK TV shows vehicles washed away in a coastal area of Japan.The Associated Press: In this image made off Japan's NHK TV video footage, houses are washed away by tsunami in Sendai, Miyagi Prefecture in eastern Japan, after a magnitude 8.9 earthquake struck off Japan's northeastern coast Friday.
