PEORIA, Ariz. — Mariners executive Hide Sueyoshi awoke Friday morning to find a text from Antony Suzuki, Ichiro's interpreter. The news was unsettling: There had been an earthquake in Japan. A big one. As someone who had lived through the massive Kobe earthquake in 1995 — the time of that deadly temblor, 5:46 a.m., is forever etched in Sueyoshi's memory — he cringes whenever he hears of a major quake. After turning on the television Friday and seeing the images of devastation, his level of concern grew exponentially. Like every member of the large network of people with ties to Japan who work for or around the Mariners, Sueyoshi began scrambling to find news of loved ones back home. His first call was to his parents in Osaka, who to his great relief were fine. "My mother was at the bus station," he said. "She felt a big wave, and thought she had dizziness. But people next to her said, 'That's an earthquake.' " The Mariners, who issued a statement expressing their concern for members of the organization affected by the quake, have always been the major-league team most closely connected with Japan, from their Nintendo ownership to their superstar outfielder, Ichiro. But there are also numerous other, less visible people, such as Sueyoshi (director of minor league and international administration, a member of the organization since 1998), the translator Suzuki, assistant athletic trainer Takayoshi Morimoto, and the large contingent of Japanese media who follow Ichiro. Less visible, but no less concerned. "Everyone is trying to call someone back home," said journalist Masa Niwa, who travels extensively with the Mariners. "But it's hard to get through." It led to a surreal morning at the Mariners complex. Normally, ESPN blares nonstop on the clubhouse television, but on Friday, it was tuned to CNN. Players who normally pass the time before the morning workout playing cards or reading the paper instead watched the updates with rapt attention — as did Ichiro when he entered the clubhouse at about 8:30 in the morning. The Mariners outfielder said he didn't want to talk to the media while the earthquake news was still unfolding. But he said he had been unable to contact his family because of phone difficulties. Ichiro's parents live in the Nagoya prefecture, between Kobe and Tokyo. "We don't know yet because cellphones and power are down. There are 4 million people without power in Tokyo," Ichiro said, speaking through Suzuki. Mariners manager Eric Wedge said he sought out Ichiro and Antony Suzuki Friday to see if everything was all right. Ichiro wasn't in the lineup and didn't make the trip to Goodyear for the Mariners' game with Cleveland. "By all accounts, the people they're close to are all OK, at least the ones they can get hold of," Wedge said. "It's a horrible tragedy, a sad situation." Ichiro was profoundly affected by the Kobe earthquake on Jan. 17, 1995, often characterizing that event as one of the most significant in his life. The 6.8 quake killed 6,434, and about 4,600 of them were from Kobe. At the time, Ichiro was asleep in the dormitory used by his Japanese team, the Orix BlueWave, located in Kobe, where Ichiro and his wife still maintain a home. The team was preparing for the upcoming spring training. For the March 12, 2008 issue of ESPN the Magazine, several athletes were asked to take them to the place "that gives them their spark." Ichiro chose to be photographed at the Kobe Port Earthquake Memorial Park in Kobe and told the magazine: "I jumped out of bed when I felt the earthquake and had an experience where I felt the possibility of death. The fear, the crushed feeling from the lost lives, the cruel spectacle of what the city I knew so intimately had become — all those things I can't forget to this day." Now those same emotions are being sadly reawakened in Japan in the aftermath of the 8.9 earthquake and resulting tsunami. Thousands of miles away in Peoria, all anyone could do was keep dialing or e-mailing, and watching the shocking footage on television. Sueyoshi said he reached one friend in Tokyo who needed six hours to walk home because the trains were stopped. Sueyoshi was unable to contact friends with the Rakuten Golden Eagles baseball team in Sendai City, near the epicenter. There was, however, a message on the team's twitter feed indicating the players are safe. Suzuki, Ichiro's interpreter, said he reached his wife, who was visiting in Tokyo, and she is fine. Sueyoshi said he has heard that the family of trainer Morimoto are OK as well. Brandon League, who has family in Hawaii, doesn't believe any of them experienced any ill effects. Still, it's a tense and sad time for those in Mariners camp who have a piece of their heart in Japan. Many still have friends and family they have been unable to reach. "Our island has all those volcanoes and earthquakes, and we prepare for it," Sueyoshi said. "But there's nothing enough to prepare for it. You never know how big it is or when it's coming. Kobe came at 5:46 in the morning, this one at 2:30 in the afternoon. You never know. We think we are prepared, but we're not." And certainly, no one is prepared for what comes after. Larry Stone: 206-464-3146Caption:  photoLenny Ignelzi / The Associated Press: Mariners outfielder Ichiro rode out the giant earthquake in Kobe in 1995, when he played in Japan.
