U.S. ships rerouted to help in Japan The U.S. military rerouted several ships toward Japan on Friday and began preparing for humanitarian missions in the wake of a devastating earthquake and tsunami that left at least hundreds dead. Although U.S. aid groups began collecting funds and emergency supplies, experts said Japan probably would not need the kind of massive support poor countries such as Haiti require after a crisis. Japan has one of the best government disaster-response agencies in the world, with long experience in recovery from earthquakes. President Obama said the main U.S. assistance would probably be "lift capacity," a reference to helicopters and planes that can carry heavy loads. The USS Tortuga, a dock-landing ship based in Sasebo, in southern Japan, was scheduled to head Friday to quake-hit areas, said Col. David Lapan, a Defense Department spokesman. The USS Blue Ridge, the command ship of the Navy's 7th Fleet, was loading humanitarian supplies in Singapore and the USS Essex, an amphibious warfare ship, was readying to leave from Malaysia. The USS Ronald Reagan, an aircraft carrier, and its strike group were near the Korean peninsula but were turning toward Japan in case they are needed. There were no reports of American deaths in Japan connected with the quake or of serious damage to U.S. military installations. GOP plan cuts tsunami funds WASHINGTON — A spending plan being pushed by Republicans would slash funding for the agency that warned Hawaii and the West Coast about the devastating tsunami in Japan. The plan, approved by the GOP-controlled House last month, would trigger an estimated $126 million in cuts for the National Weather Service, the agency that houses the Pacific Tsunami Warning Center in Hawaii. A union representing workers at the tsunami center said the proposed cuts — part of $454 million in cuts for the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration — could result in furloughs and rolling closures of weather-service offices. Also Shortly after the earthquake and tsunami hit, Google launched its Person Finder technology, an interactive database that allows users to search for missing persons online or submit information about people who are injured or were missing. Seattle Times news services
