SANT'AGOSTINO DI FERRARA, Italy — Cheese producer Oriano Caretti woke up to the shaking earth, and then to the roar of some 30,000 86-pound wheels of Parmesan cheese crashing to the ground in the warehouse next to his home. The 6.0-magnitude quake north of Bologna that killed seven people and toppled centuries-old buildings also caused enormous damage to the region's cheese production. The Coldiretti Italian farm lobby said 400,000 wheels of Parmesan and Grana Padano cheese were damaged when the racks where they are aged collapsed. Agriculture losses, including lost cheese, felled livestock and damaged machinery in an area spanning Bologna, Modena and Mantova in the agriculturally rich Po River Valley, are estimated at $254 million. "Considering that what you see here represents the work of seven companies for two years, this means that the repercussions on the rural economy of these farms and this territory will feel it pretty badly," Caretti said Monday inside the cheese factory, where wooden shelves were collapsed from the quake. Only one rack of 16 remained standing. The quake struck at 4:04 a.m. Sunday, when most residents in the quake zone north of Bologna were asleep. Residential buildings in an area unaccustomed to quakes largely withstood the temblor. But factories in the region were at work despite the economic crisis that has sent Italy into recession and despite the hour, and many collapsed. Four of the seven dead were workers on the overnight shift who were buried in rubble, including two at the Ceramica Sant'Agostino tile company. The other three victims — including a German tourist and an Italian centenarian — died of heart attacks or other health conditions. Family-run Ceramica Sant'Agostino, which employs 350 workers to produce 23,000 square meters of tiles a day for global distribution, has been idled while inspectors determine if structures on the site are safe. The fatal collapse of at least three factories has raised concerns about the safety of recently built industrial structures in the region. Ceramica Sant'Agostino said its buildings adhered to "maximum safety" and that it was cooperating with inspectors. Many of the region's landmarks also suffered considerable damage, including the city hall of Sant'Agostino and the 13th-century clock tower, which was split vertically in half, of Finale Emilia. "The historic center has completely collapsed. I would have never imagined that such a thing could happen in Finale. We never thought such an earthquake could hit the city," said Stefano Pignatti, a resident of the small town, surveying the damage. The last big quake to hit the region was in the 1300s. In terms of economic impact, the artisanal-cheese sector appears to be the hardest hit. At least 10 percent of Parmesan production has been impacted, according to early estimates by the Parmigiano-Reggiano Cheese Consortium, which annually generates 1.2 million euros in production revenues and 1.9 billion euros in consumer sales. In all, some 10 collective Parmesan-aging warehouse and cheese-production sites have sustained damage in the quake, affecting 300,000 wheels, half of which are estimated to be at least a partial loss. "The fallen forms in some cases can certainly be recovered and moved to another warehouse to finish aging," consortium spokesman Igino Morini said. Partially damaged wheels may be salvaged for mixed-cheese products or prepackaged foods — at a fraction of their value as fully aged Parmigiano-Reggiano. Despite the considerable work of sorting damaged wheels, the Carettis were producing new cheese on Monday. "Cows produce milk and it needs to be transformed," Caretti said. Meanwhile, officials were checking government buildings, schools, businesses, homes, churches and other cultural heritage sites to evaluate the damage and rebuilding costs. Some 4,500 people have been displaced by the quake. Moderate quake rocks Bulgaria SOFIA, Bulgaria — The U.S. Geological Survey says a moderate earthquake with a magnitude of 5.6 struck near the Bulgarian capital of Sofia early Tuesday. There are no immediate reports of injuries or significant damage. The quake struck shortly after 3 a.m. local time Tuesday near the town of Pernik about 14 miles west of Sofia. The U.S. agency measured its depth at a relatively shallow 5.8 miles.Caption:  photoLuca Bruno / The Associated Press: Oriano Caretti looks at overturned shelves with Parmesan wheels in his factory Monday. A 6.0-magnitude quake north of Bologna, Italy, damaged the region's cheese production.
