CANGREJAL, Costa Rica — A powerful magnitude 7.6 earthquake shook Costa Rica and neighboring countries Wednesday, sending panicked people into the streets and briefly triggering a tsunami alert, but causing little damage. Officials said the quake collapsed some houses and at least one bridge and caused landslides that blocked highways. But Costa Rica President Laura Chinchilla said there were no reports of major damage and called for calm. Residents described being shocked by the force of the quake, which was felt as far away as Panama and Nicaragua and was the biggest since a 7.6-magnitude quake in 1991 left 47 people dead. The quake was somewhat deep — 25 miles below the surface. Quakes that occur deeper underground tend to be less damaging, but more widely felt. "If it was a shallower event, it would be a significantly higher hazard," said seismologist Daniel McNamara of the U.S. Geological Survey. The U.S. Geological Survey said the quake was centered 38 miles from the town of Liberia and 87 miles west of the capital, San Jose. The area is a seismically active zone where the Cocos tectonic plate dives beneath the Caribbean plate. "All along the Pacific Coast of Central America, you can expect fairly big earthquakes," McNamara said. The quake was followed by three strong aftershocks of magnitudes 4.6, 4.5 and 4.4. The Guanacaste region around the epicenter is a popular tourist destination known for its pristine beaches and nature and marine reserves. Costa Rica is also a popular destination for American retirees. Officials initially warned of a possible tsunami, and Samara local police supervisor Jose Angel Gomez said about 5,000 people — 80 percent of the town's population — had been evacuated from coastal towns in and near the quake's epicenter. By midday they were allowed to return. In San Jose, frightened residents ran into the streets, and cellphone and Internet service failed. Some neighborhoods lost electricity. Douglas Salgado, a geographer with Costa Rica's National Commission of Risk Prevention and Emergency Attention, said a landslide hit the main highway that connects the capital to the Pacific Coast city of Puntarenas, and hotels and other structures had cracked walls and items knocked from shelves. In the past four decades, the region has been rocked by 30 earthquakes of magnitude 6 and larger. The last deadly quake was in 2009, when 40 people died in a magnitude 6.1 temblor.Caption:  mapMark Nowlin / The Seattle Times: 7.6 magnitude earthquake (G3K201QID)
