DALBADI, Pakistan  — Survivors built makeshift shelters with sticks and bedsheets Wednesday, a day after their mud houses were flattened in an earthquake that killed at least 285 people in southwestern Pakistan and pushed a new island up out of the Arabian Sea. While waiting for help to reach remote villages, hungry people dug through the rubble to find food. And the country’s poorest province struggled with a dearth of medical supplies, hospitals and other aid.  The magnitude-7.7 earthquake struck Tuesday and was felt across the country. But its force was greatest in a particularly impoverished part of Baluchistan province, and it flattened wide swaths of Awaran district, where it was centered, leaving much of the population homeless.  Almost all of the 300 mud-brick homes in the village of Dalbadi were destroyed. Noor Ahmad said he was working when the quake struck and rushed home to find his house leveled and his wife and son dead.  “I’m broken,” he said. “I have lost my family.”  At least 373 people also were injured, according to a statement from the National Disaster Management Authority, which gave the latest death toll.  Doctors in the village treated some of the injured, but because of a scarcity of medicine and staff, they were mostly seen comforting residents.  Baluchistan is Pakistan’s largest province but also the least populated. Medical facilities are few and often poorly stocked with supplies and qualified personnel. Awaran district has about 300,000 residents spread over 11,197 square miles.  The local economy consists mostly of smuggling fuel from Iran or harvesting dates.  The area where the quake struck is at the center of an insurgency that Baluch separatists have been waging against the Pakistani government for years. The separatists regularly attack Pakistani troops and symbols of the state, such as infrastructure projects.  The area’s remoteness and lack of infrastructure hampered relief efforts.  Just getting to victims was challenging in a region with almost no roads where many people use four-wheel-drive vehicles and camels to traverse the rough terrain.  “We need more tents, more medicine and more food,” said a spokesman for the provincial government, Jan Mohammad Bulaidi.  Images from the village of Kaich showed the devastation. Houses made mostly of mud and handmade bricks had collapsed. Walls and roofs caved in, and people’s possessions were scattered on the ground. A few goats roamed through the ruins.  The Pakistani military said it had rushed almost 1,000 troops to the area overnight and was sending helicopters. A convoy of 60 Pakistani army trucks left the port city of Karachi early Wednesday with supplies.  Pakistani forces have evacuated more than 170 people from villages around Awaran to the district hospital, the military said. Others were evacuated to Karachi.  Local officials said they were sending doctors, food and 1,000 tents for people who had nowhere to sleep. Strong aftershocks complicated the efforts.  Also Wednesday, the government released photos of   the  island of mud, stone and bubbling gas pushed forth from the seabed during the  quake.  “That big shock beneath the earth causes a lot of disturbance,” said Zahid Rafi, director of the National Seismic Monitoring Center.  The island appeared off the coast of Gwadar, a port about 330 miles  from Karachi.  Navy geologist Mohammed Danish told Pakistan’s Geo Television that a Pakistani Navy team visited the island Wednesday. He said the mass was about 60 feet  high, 100 feet  wide and 250 feet  long —  a little wider than a tennis court and slightly shorter than a football field.  Experts still are trying to determine what caused this island, but it could have been a mud volcano, one said.  The island’s appearance electrified people who flocked to the beach and took to boats to visit the island, despite warnings from officials who worried about gas emanating from the island.  Dead fish floated on the water’s surface, and local residents took stones from the land mass as souvenirs.Caption:  The Gwadar local government released this photo of people walking on Wednesday  on a new island that emerged off the coast in the Arabian Sea when a magnitude-7.7 earthquake struck in Pakistan. The Associated Press
