NAPA, Calif. — The earthquake that struck Northern California early Sunday will lead to economic losses of as much as $4 billion, fueled by damaged wineries and shuttered businesses that rely on tourists. The Napa-Sonoma area is home to one of California’s best-known wine-growing regions. Napa County has 789 licensed wineries, which had sales of $5.5 billion in 2011, according to the Napa Valley Vintners Association, a trade group.  “It was a significant earthquake,” City Manager Mike Parness said in an interview. “Given the magnitude and the reports of damage, this is going to take some time to get back from.”  Insurers will probably cover about $2.1 billion, according to an estimate from Kinetic Analysis Corp., which projected total losses of about twice that sum. Many homeowners don’t have earthquake coverage, according to the Insurance Information Institute.  In California, where most of the costliest U.S. earthquakes have occurred, just 12 percent of residents are protected against that risk, which is excluded from a standard homeowners’ policy, according to III, an industry group. The figure is about half that in the Napa area, said Robert Hartwig, president  of the Insurance Information Institute.  “The main source of claims could well be commercial claims, those coming from wineries and vineyards and other commercial interests,” Hartwig said.  The temblor, the strongest in Northern California in 25 years, hit the Napa region north of San Francisco at about 3:20 a.m. Sunday, crumpling historic buildings, cracking roads and injuring more than 120 people. The quake left many in the region without power and water, and California Gov.  Jerry Brown declared the zone a disaster area.  At least 65 aftershocks have rattled Napa and its surrounding areas since the quake,  according to the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS).  In Napa, debris and broken glass littered sidewalks in front of restaurants, wine stores and antique shops. The city updated the number of buildings “red-tagged” as being uninhabitable to 33, including the Napa Senior Center. PG&E utility crews checked about 100 reports of gas leaks and odor and reported determined there are no more leaks, the city said on its website late Monday.  Napa also issued a boil-water advisory, which will be rescinded once all the 60 water lines are repaired and water service has been tested and restored.  Sunday’s quake occurred on the West Napa fault. It’s about 20 miles, much shorter than the better-known Hayward and Rodgers Creek faults, which are capable of a 7.2-magnitude quake. Still, it produced the largest earthquake in the Bay Area since the deadly 6.9 Loma Prieta quake in 1989.  Sunday’s shaking was dwarfed in magnitude and sheer destruction by that much larger earthquake, as well as 1971 and 1994 San Fernando Valley temblors.  But considering that Sunday’s earthquake ran less than half the length of the fault, scientists said it could have been worse.  “This is one of the smaller of the sets of faults in the East Bay, but it’s still obviously large enough to create a magnitude-6 quake, and it didn’t rupture the length of the whole fault,” said Jeane Hardebeck, a USGS seismologist in Menlo Park, Calif. “If it had, you could imagine a much larger earthquake.”  Like a lot of faults, she said, it runs parallel to the roughly 800-mile-long San Andreas fault. Sunday’s quake happened just south of Napa and ran north along the fault, which runs through the western side of the Napa Valley, Hardebeck said.Caption:  Damaged wine barrels stand outside Napa Barrel Care on Monday. Experts say Sunday’s quake ruptured along only part of  a local geological fault and could have been worse. Eric Risberg / The Associated Press
