LOS ANGELES — A moderate earthquake that rattled a swath of Southern California forced several dozen people in one city out of their homes after firefighters discovered foundation problems that made the buildings unsafe to enter, authorities said Saturday. Fire crews red-tagged 20 apartment units in a building in the Orange County city of Fullerton after finding a major foundation crack. Structural woes, including broken and leaning chimneys, were uncovered in half a dozen single-family houses, which were also deemed unsafe to occupy until inspectors clear the structures. The damage displaced 83 residents.  Despite the evacuations and scattered damage, Friday night’s magnitude-5.1 earthquake centered about 25 miles south of downtown Los Angeles mostly frayed nerves.  The quake was preceded by two smaller foreshocks. More than 100 aftershocks followed, including a magnitude-4.4 that hit Saturday afternoon, the largest in the sequence that was felt over a wide region. No injuries were reported.  Residents were inconvenienced and some lost valuables, but “thankfully the damage wasn’t greater,” said Chi-Chung Keung, a Fullerton spokesman.  Business owners in Orange County spent the aftermath sweeping up shattered glass and restocking shelves. Utility crews worked to restore power and shut off gas leaks and fix water-main breaks. A rock slide in the Carbon Canyon area of nearby Brea also caused a car to overturn. The occupants had minor injuries, and the road remained closed to traffic.  The Red Cross opened a shelter in La Habra but closed it once the 38 people who stayed overnight returned home.  “Everything is starting to get settled down here,” La Habra police Sgt. Mel Ruiz said.  In Fullerton, some residents will have to stay elsewhere until building inspectors can check out the red-tagged apartments and houses and give an all-clear, Fire Battalion Chief John Stokes said.  Friday’s jolt was the strongest to strike the greater Los Angeles region since 2008.Caption:  A woman walks her dog past a broken block wall in Fullerton, Calif., on Saturday, after a magnitude-5.1 quake hit overnight. More than 100 aftershocks have rattled the area. KEN STEINHARDT, / The Associated Press
