KATHMANDU, Nepal — Still reeling from last month’s devastating earthquake, Nepal was hammered again Tuesday by a magnitude 7.3 temblor that caused dozens more deaths, unleashed fresh landslides and brought down unsteady buildings. By late afternoon, Nepal’s Home Affairs Ministry said at least 42 people were killed and more than 1,117 injured in the largest aftershock yet recorded from the 7.8 quake on April 25. Officials warned that the toll could rise.  Separately, the U.S. military reported that a Marine helicopter from a unit based at Camp Pendleton, Calif., had gone missing Tuesday while on a humanitarian mission in the Charikot area of Nepal.  The helicopter, a UH-1Y Huey, was carrying two Nepalese soldiers and six Marines, said Army Maj. Dave Eastburn, a Pacific Command spokesman.  The aircraft belonged to Marine Light Attack Helicopter Squadron 469 at Camp Pendleton.  The epicenter for Tuesday’s quake was nearly 50 miles northeast of the capital, Kathmandu, near the Chinese border, according to the U.S. Geological Survey.  The April quake, which killed more than 8,150 people, was centered in the mountains west of Kathmandu.  The temblor struck just before 1 p.m., sending residents of the capital scurrying into the open air for safety, and was followed by smaller aftershocks that further rattled nerves.  Within hours, new makeshift tents began popping up in parts of Kathmandu as survivors of last month’s quake who had returned to their homes in recent days decided again they were safer sleeping outdoors.  The Home Affairs Ministry said nine people were pulled out alive from damaged buildings in the remote Dolakha district, close to the quake’s epicenter near Mount Everest, and three from structures in Kathmandu.  Three U.S. military aircraft were taking 20 U.S. personnel, including 18 urban search-and-rescue team members, “to conduct initial assessments in Charikot,” the seat of Dolakha district.  It was not immediately clear whether the missing Marine helicopter was among them.  At least 30 of the country’s 75 administrative districts were affected, according to state-run Radio Nepal.  The quake caused the temporary closure of Kathmandu’s Tribhuvan International Airport, the hub for relief operations, and was felt as far away as New Delhi, about 500 miles west of Kathmandu.  At least four were killed in Chautara, the seat of Sindhupalchowk district, said Paul Dillon, a spokesman for the International Organization for Migration, citing reports from colleagues there.  April’s quake damaged or destroyed about 90 percent of the buildings in the town of about 6,000, which is on a rugged ridgeline.  Landslides were reported in parts of Sindhupalchowk, which suffered the greatest number of casualties in last month’s quake. It was not immediately clear whether the landslides caused new casualties.  In central Kathmandu’s Durbar Square, which was all but leveled in the April quake, debris tumbled to the ground from the damaged hulk of a nine-story palace.  Residents of the capital ran into the streets to escape damaged buildings and crammed into city buses in an apparent effort to get home.  Japan earthquake  A strong earthquake hit Japan on Wednesday in the same region devastated by a major quake and tsunami in 2011. Authorities said there was no risk of a tsunami. The Japan Meteorological Agency put the preliminary magnitude at 6.6; the U.S. Geological Service measured it at 6.8. The quake struck at a depth of 30 miles off the coast of Miyagi prefecture. It shook a swath of northern Japan and was felt in Tokyo, 260 miles to the southwest. The quake was believed to be an aftershock of the magnitude 9.0 disaster that killed more than 18,000 people in March 2011, Japan’s public television NHK reported. No abnormalities were reported at the Fukushima Dai-ichi nuclear-power plant, which was destroyed in the 2011 disaster, as well as other plants in the area.  The Associated PressCaption:  A Mexican rescue worker stands near a collapsed building in Kathmandu, Nepal. A magnitude 7.3 aftershock was reported Tuesday, killing at least several dozen people. Niranjan Shrestha / The Associated Press
