The last damaging earthquake in Washington struck 15 years ago, on Feb. 28, 2001. The next one is scheduled for June 7.  The ground isn’t expected to actually shake this spring. But nearly 6,000 emergency and military personnel will pretend it is during a four-day exercise to test response to a seismic event that will dwarf the 2001 Nisqually quake: A Cascadia megaquake and tsunami.  Called “ Cascadia Rising,” the exercise will be the biggest ever conducted in the Pacific Northwest. Which is fitting, because a rupture on the offshore fault called the Cascadia Subduction Zone could be the biggest natural disaster in U.S. history.  “It’s really going to require the entire nation to respond to an event like this,” said Kenneth Murphy, regional director for the Federal Emergency Management Agency, which is coordinating the exercise.  While the Nisqually earthquake measured magnitude 6.8, a Cascadia megaquake is likely to hit magnitude 9 — which is nearly 2,000 times more powerful. It will   affect the entire West Coast from British Columbia to Northern California, including Seattle, Portland, Tacoma and Vancouver, B.C. The quake will be closely followed by tsunamis 30 feet high — or bigger — that will slam into oceanfront communities.  The damage and casualty estimates in FEMA’s quake scenario are sobering:  • More than 10,000 fatalities, mostly due to the tsunami  • 30,000 injuries  • 7,000 highway bridges and 16,000 miles of highway with high to moderate levels of damage  • 90 percent of port facilities destroyed or damaged  • Natural-gas and refined-fuel pipelines out of service  • 70 percent of electrical power systems damaged  • Serious damage to   water-treatment and sewage plants  “For this scenario, we felt we really had to get all the experts in the room and use the best modeling and research that exists,” said Scott Zaffram, FEMA training and exercises branch chief. But the estimates are just that, he cautioned. The number of deaths, for example, would be much lower if the quake struck at 2 a.m. in January than at noon on a summer’s day when beaches are crowded.  During the Cascadia Rising exercise, emergency managers will do their best to deal with the theoretical catastrophe, with the goal of identifying problems and improving response when the real thing happens.  “We’re going to learn something at every level of government ... that will help us figure out better ways to plan for this,” Murphy said.  The drill will be conducted mostly at the tabletop level. Workers will staff their posts at emergency-operations centers across Washington, Oregon, Idaho and British Columbia, fielding simulated damage reports, responding to calls for help, coping with power outages and tracking down resources and rescuers.  Phone and Internet services are expected to be knocked out, so teams will practice communicating via satellite phone and emergency radio frequencies.  In Grays Harbor County on the Washington coast, where many towns are in the tsunami inundation zone and ground shaking is expected to be fierce, emergency manager Chuck Wallace has recruited local ham-radio operators to participate.  “They have radios in their trucks,” he said. “They can hook up to a car battery and they’re rolling, so we should be able to get reconnaissance information from them.”  Wallace encouraged organizers to add aftershocks and multiple tsunami surges to the exercise scenario, to make it as realistic as possible. He and his staff are also prepared to consider some grim possibilities, such as a tsunami that completely overtops the cities of   Ocean Shores and Westport, killing all public officials.  At the state level, Murphy is challenging elected officials and emergency managers to ask similarly tough questions. “If you have every county in Washington damaged, who gets what first?” he asked.  Several military units will conduct field exercises in conjunction with Cascadia Rising. More than 1,500 members of Washington’s National Guard will set up tactical operations centers, dispatch search and rescue teams, and move supplies, said spokeswoman Karina Shagren.  At least one naval vessel will respond as if to a real disaster, establishing an emergency dock and transporting cargo, equipment and personnel.  The participation of so many state and local governments, agencies and military units is important because the quake and tsunami will affect such a large area, said Jim Mullen, former director of the Washington State Emergency Management Division.  Eastern Washington and Idaho won’t experience much, if any quake damage, but they will be key for relocating refugees, treating victims, and transporting supplies.  Mullen cautioned against the tendency of agencies and organizations to “paper over” their failings in exercises like these. “Identifying gaps is good,” he said. “That means you found something we’re not good at — but now we can fix it.”  And even though the Cascadia Rising exercise is focused on the immediate response to the disaster, officials should also use it as a springboard for discussions about long-term recovery and efforts to get the region’s economy back on track, Mullen said.  The last Cascadia megaquake and tsunami occurred in the year 1700. Estimates of average recurrence intervals vary from 250 to 500 years — but geologists say there’s no doubt the fault will rupture again some day.  Those who weathered the Nisqually quake shouldn’t count on such a mild ride the next time around, Wallace said.  “A Cascadia quake is very different,” he said. “We can’t afford to become complacent.”Caption:  The Nisqually earthquake on Feb. 28, 2001, caused damage in Pioneer Square, including to this vehicle on Second Avenue and South Jackson that was showered with bricks. Greg Gilbert / The Seattle Times, 2001, Fifteen years after the Nisqually quake, FEMA is preparing an exercise to test response to a far more damaging magnitude 9 Cascadia megaquake and tsunami. A grandfather holds his granddaughter as he surveys the front of the building on 10th Avenue South and South Jackson Street.   A portion at the top of the west part of building collapsed, followed by the front portion right after the two left the building.  Jimi Lott / The Seattle Times, 2001 Bricks litter the sidewalk on South Weller Street in Seattle's Chinatown/International District where a couple was hit by falling bricks from a collapsing cornice. Barry Wong / The Seattle Times, 2001 A woman injured by falling bricks as she walked out of a building when the earthquake hit is carried to paramedics in Seattle's Chinatown/International District. Barry Wong / The Seattle Times, 2001 After the earthquake destroyed the outside wall of their architecture office in Pioneer Square, a couple finish removing items from the debris. Tom Reese / The Seattle Times, 2001 The day after the Nisqually quake, bricks and debris that landed on a truck were being removed on First Avenue in Pioneer Square. Tom Reese / The Seattle Times, 2001 Employees hug one another   outside the Fenix Cafe in Pioneer Square. Both had just shown up for work as the Nisqually quake struck. Alan Berner / The Seattle Times, 2001 There was a lot of cleanup to do at this Pioneer Square grocery store after the 6.8 earthquake shook goods off the shelves.  Alan Berner / The Seattle Times, 2001 The damage in Pioneer Square was extensive after the Nisqually quake. Andrea J. Wright / The Seattle Times, 2001 Broken glass is removed from shattered windows on First Avenue in downtown Seattle. Tom Reese / The Seattle Times, 2001 Then Gov. Gary Locke took a look at damage to the sidewalk and roadway of Deschutes Parkway on the west side of Capitol Lake in Olympia. Betty Udesen / The Seattle Times, 2001 Almost all of the windows of the control tower at Seattle-Tacoma International Airport were blown out by the earthquake. Greg Gilbert / The Seattle Times, 2001 A plane takes off from Boeing Field as a crew stands on the runway assessing the damage and discusses the repair of the cracks caused by the earthquake. Ellen M. Banner / The Seattle Times, 2001 Tenants of the El Capitan apartment building on Capitol Hill clean up earthquake damage including bricks and debris that fell from a parapet wall on top of the building.   Tom Reese / The Seattle Times, 2001 Roger Faris, a home-safety expert, was getting ready for a gathering to celebrate Project Impact, a public-private partnership to promote building retrofits for earthquakes. The Nisqually quake canceled the meeting.   Betty Udesen / The Seattle Times, 2001 The quake caused a mudslide that flowed into the Cedar River in Renton's Maple Valley, creating a dam and flood, and shifted a truck that nearly reached a house. Tom Reese / The Seattle Times, 2001 Bo Weeks surveys the damage to Highway 302, an east-west link for Key Peninsula to Gig Harbor as well as Tacoma. Mike Siegel / The Seattle Times, 2001 The State Capitol building in Olympia has some loose stones separating after the Nisqually quake. Greg Gilbert / The Seattle Times, 2001 Then state Sen. Jeanne Kohl-Welles (now a Metropolitan King County Council member) surveys her damaged office in the Cherberg office building on the Capital Campus in Olympia. Dean Rutz / The Seattle Times, 2001 The “Gary Clock,” a wall clock hanging in the reporter's bureau across the street from the state capital, stopped at the precise moment of the quake. Dean Rutz / The Seattle Times, 2001 The Nisqually quake left cracks and holes in wall of the State Legislative Building in Olympia.  Greg Gilbert / The Seattle Times, 2001Memo:  Sandi Doughton at: 206-464-2491 or sdoughton@seattletimes.com
