OKLAHOMA CITY — A 5.6 magnitude earthquake centered near the city of Pawnee struck Oklahoma on Saturday, tying a record set in 2011 for the strongest such tremor in state history, according to the National Weather Service. Local officials reported moderate to severe damage and at least one nonlife-threatening injury.  “We are finding a lot of rural houses north, northwest of Pawnee that are seeing extensive damage,” said Sheriff Mike Waters of Pawnee County.  The earthquake on the edge of Oklahoma’s key energy-producing areas rattled the Midwest from Nebraska to North Texas and likely will bring fresh attention to the practice of disposing of oil- and gas-field wastewater deep underground.  The United States Geological Survey (USGS) said the 5.6 magnitude earthquake happened at 7:02 a.m. on the fringe of an area where regulators had stepped in to limit wastewater disposal. That temblor matches a November 2011 quake in the same region. The USGS recorded subsequent earthquakes Saturday of magnitudes 3.6, 3.4 and 2.9.  An increase in magnitude 3.0 or greater earthquakes in Oklahoma has been linked to underground disposal of wastewater from oil and natural-gas production.  Seismologists say the quakes are caused by high-pressure injection of wastewater from oil and gas wells, both conventional ones and those that are hydraulically fractured, or fracked. As wastewater under pressure migrates into rock formations below ground, it alters stresses along old faults, allowing them to slip.  The USGS acknowledged in a statement that oil and gas activity has set off many earthquakes but said it could not yet say the practice caused Saturday’s quake.  The Oklahoma Corporation Commission, which since 2013 has asked wastewater-well owners to reduce disposal volumes in parts of the state, is requiring 37 wells in a 514-square mile area around the epicenter of the earthquake to shut down within seven to 10 days because of previous connections between the injection of wastewater and earthquakes.  People in Kansas City and St. Louis, Mo.; Chicago; Gilbert, Ariz.; Fayetteville and Little Rock, Ark.; Des Moines, Iowa; Memphis, Tenn.; and Big Lake in southwest Texas all reported feeling the earthquake. Dallas TV station WFAA tweeted that the quake shook its studios, too.  Pawnee County Emergency Management Director Mark Randell said no buildings collapsed in the town of 2,200 about nine miles southeast of the epicenter. “We’ve got buildings cracked,” Randell said.  Randell also said a man suffered a minor head injury when part of a fireplace fell on him as he protected a child. The man was treated and released.  Oklahoma Gov. Mary Fallin declared a state of emergency for the county, allowing state agencies to make emergency purchases related to disaster relief and preparedness.  The damage is not as severe as the 2011 quake near Prague, about 60 miles south of Pawnee, despite being the same magnitude and about the same depth. Saturday’s quake was 3.7 miles deep, compared with 3.1 miles in 2011. Both are shallow quakes, during which shaking is more intense, like setting off “a bomb directly under a city,” USGS seismologist Susan Hough has said.  However, hard bedrock beneath the surface in north-central Oklahoma is likely the reason for less damage, Oklahoma Geological Survey geophysicist Jefferson Chang said, adding that the subsurface around Prague is softer.  Pawnee furniture store owner Lee Wills said he first thought it was a thunderstorm. “ Everything went crazy after that. It just started shaking,” said Wills, who lives about 2½ miles outside town. “It rocked my house like a rubber band. Threw stuff off cabinets and out of cabinets, broke glasses.”Caption:  Kyndra Richards cleans up at White's Foodliner in Pawnee, Oka., after an early morning earthquake Saturday. PAUL HELLSTERN / The OklahomanMemo:  Material from The New York Times is included in this report.
