ISLAMABAD — A powerful earthquake rattled Pakistan’s capital and other cities on Sunday, killing at least five people officials said. The National Disaster Management Authority said there were many   injured after a  7.1 magnitude  earthquake centered in Afghanistan’s Hindu Kush region.  According to the United States Geological Survey, the earthquake was centered in a remote northeastern region of Afghanistan, near the country’s border with Tajikistan and Pakistan. It was measured at a depth of 130 miles.  Residents fled their homes and offices in the capital, Islamabad, as buildings swayed. Tremors were felt as far away as the Indian capital, New Delhi.Tremors were also felt in Kabul, the capital of Afghanistan, and in Kashmir, witnesses said, according to Reuters.  Two officials the NDMA said the quake toppled the walls of homes in the northwest, killing one person. They said 30 wounded people were taken to hospitals in the northwest.  A Pakistani student, Kiran Saeed, said she was studying at home in Rawalpindi, near Islamabad, when it felt like someone shook her chair. “When I turned back, no one was there and then the walls started shaking. We came out of the home and everyone was reciting verses from the Quran,” she said.  Sahiba Bibi, an Islamabad resident, said she almost fell to the ground when the tremors began.  “I am still very terrified,” she said.  “I was watching a movie on my laptop when the room started shaking,” said Muhammad Nasir, 30, who lives on the second floor of an apartment complex. “I rushed downstairs after the first tremor. Almost all of the residents of the building were outside within seconds. They came out like bees.”  Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif directed provincial and federal authorities to remain alert and provide assistance to those affected by the earthquake.  Sunday’s quake was the strongest since October, when a magnitude-7.5 earthquake damaged thousands of homes in the northwest.  The South Asia region has a history of catastrophic earthquakes because the tectonic plate that carries the Indian subcontinent is pushing northward into the main Asian plate.  A strong temblor in Nepal in April 2015 — the most powerful to hit the country since at least 1934 — killed more than 8,000 people and triggered deadly avalanches on Mount Everest.  Pakistan is considered an area of high seismic activity, and quakes have shaken the country regularly in recent years.  In 2005, tens of thousands were killed when a 7.6-magnitude earthquake struck in Kashmir.Caption:  A man who was injured in the earthquake is taken to a hospital in Peshawar, Pakistan, on Sunday. ARSHAD ARBAB / EPA
