QUITO, Ecuador — A powerful, 7.8-magnitude earthquake shook Ecuador’s central coast on Saturday, killing at least 41 people and spreading panic hundreds of miles away as it collapsed homes and buckled a major overpass. The U.S. Geological Survey said the shallow quake, the strongest since 1979 to hit Ecuador, was centered 16 miles south-southeast of Muisne, a sparsely populated area of fishing ports that’s popular with tourists.  Vice President Jorge Glas said in a televised address that there were initial reports of 41 dead in the cities of Manta, Portoviejo and Guayaquil — all several hundred miles from where the quake struck shortly after nightfall. He said the death toll is likely to rise as reports from the worst-hit areas come in.  “We’re trying to do the most we can, but there’s almost nothing we can do,” said Gabriel Alcivar, mayor of Pedernales, a town of 40,000 near the epicenter. He pleaded for rescuers after dozens of buildings in the town were flattened, people trapped and looting broke out amid the chaos. “This wasn’t just a house that collapsed, it was an entire town.”  Among those killed was the driver of a car crushed by an overpass that buckled in Guayaquil, Ecuador’s most populous city.  On social media, residents shared images of homes collapsed, the roof of a shopping center coming apart and supermarket shelves shaking violently. In Manta, the airport was closed after the control tower collapsed, injuring an air-force official.  President Rafael Correa, who was in Rome after attending a Vatican conference Friday, called on Ecuadoreans to stay strong while authorities monitor events.  He said on Twitter that he had declared a national emergency and planned to be back in  Ecuador Sunday.  The Pacific Tsunami Warning Center said hazardous tsunami waves were possible for some coasts.  Glas urged residents along the coast to move to higher ground, and towns near the epicenter were being evacuated as a precaution.  Sporting events and concerts were canceled nationwide.  “It’s very important that Ecuadoreans remain calm during this emergency,” Glas said from Ecuador’s national crisis room.  The quake was felt across the border in Colombia, where it shook residents in Cali and Popayan, and Peru briefly issued a tsunami alert.  In Ecuador’s capital, Quito, more than 100 miles away, the quake was felt for about 40 seconds and people fled to the streets in fear. The quake knocked out electricity in several neighborhoods, and six homes collapsed, but the situation was under control and power being restored, Quito’s Mayor Mauricio Rodas said.  “I’m in a state of panic,” said Zoila Villena, one of many Quito residents who congregated in the streets. “My building moved a lot and things fell to the floor. Lots of neighbors were screaming and kids crying.”  The U.S. Geological Survey first put the quake at a magnitude of 7.4, then raised it to 7.8. It had a depth of about 12 miles. At least 36 aftershocks followed, one as strong as 6 on the Richter scale, and authorities urged residents to brace for even stronger ones still to come.  Guayaquil’s international airport was closed because of a lack of communications.
