WELLINGTON, New Zealand — A powerful earthquake struck New Zealand’s South Island early Monday, killing at least two people, damaging buildings and infrastructure, and prompting warnings to people along the coast to move to higher ground to avoid possible tsunami waves. The magnitude 7.8 earthquake struck just after midnight in a mostly rural area that’s dotted with small towns. Near the epicenter, it opened up snaking fissures in roads and triggered landslides.  It caused damage in Wellington, the capital, more than 120 miles to the north. It was also strongly felt to the south in the city of Christchurch, which was devastated by an earthquake in 2011 that killed 185 people. Residents said the shaking went on for about three minutes and was followed by a number of strong aftershocks.  The quake was centered 57 miles northeast of Christchurch, according to the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS). The   quake struck at a depth of 14 miles. Earthquakes tend to be more strongly felt on the surface when they are shallow.  Police said one person died in the small coastal town of Kaikoura and another in Mt. Lyford, a nearby ski resort.  The quake completely cut off road access to Kaikoura, said resident Terry Thompson, who added that electricity and most phones were also down in the town of 2,000, a popular destination for tourists taking part in whale-watching expeditions.  The main road to Kaikoura was blocked in places by landslides, and police were working to airlift out a few tourists stranded in their campervans.  Prime Minister John Key, who went to Kaikoura by helicopter Monday afternoon, said waves of about 6 feet hit the coast but an earlier tsunami threat had since been downgraded to coastal warnings.  He said authorities had no reason to believe the death toll would rise above the two reported fatalities.  “On the very best information we have at the moment, we think it’s only likely to be two. But of course there are isolated parts of the country which we don’t have perfect eyes on, so we can’t be 100 percent sure,” he said.  The quake temporarily knocked out New Zealand’s emergency call number, 111, police reported. In Wellington, it collapsed a ferry loading ramp, broke windows and caused items to fall from shelves. It also forced hundreds of tourists onto the streets as hotels were evacuated.  New Zealand, with a population of 4.7 million, sits on the “Ring of Fire,” an arc of seismic faults around the Pacific Ocean where earthquakes are common.  Monday’s quake brought back memories of the magnitude 6.3 earthquake that struck Christchurch in 2011 and destroyed much of the downtown area. That quake was one of New Zealand’s worst disasters, causing an estimated $25 billion in damage.  Monday’s quake was stronger but its epicenter was deeper and much farther from major urban areas. Location, depth and other factors beyond magnitude all contribute to the destructive power of an earthquake.  When the quake hit, Christchurch resident Hannah Gin had just sat down in her living room to watch a replay of the national rugby team’s weekend match against Italy when her house started shaking. Upstairs, her mother let out a scream.  The 24-year-old is accustomed to quakes in the temblor-prone region, so she said she sat calmly and waited, figuring the rumbling would stop in a few seconds. Instead, she said by telephone, the shaking went on and on — for at least three minutes, according to the clock on her phone.  “I could hear the sliding door sliding back and forth, and we’ve got washing hanging up and I could see the washing moving,” Gin said. “It just kept going and going.”Caption:  A paved road is lifted at the port in Wellington, New Zealand, on Monday after a magnitude 7.8 earthquake struck the South Island. Mark MItchell / New Zealand Herald
