LOS ANGELES — President Donald Trump’s budget proposal would cut federal funding for an earthquake early-warning system for California, Oregon and Washington state, a development that seismology experts and some local leaders say would be the end of the project. The system being developed in conjunction with various universities is intended to  provide critical seconds of warning when an earthquake has started and potentially dangerous shaking is imminent. The system would allow time for people to take cover and to slow or halt such things as critical industrial processes and transportation systems.  A version of the ShakeAlert system has been undergoing testing, but still needs to have more seismic sensors installed in Northern California, Oregon and Washington. The proposed funding cuts for the next fiscal year starting Oct. 1 would come from the budget of the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS), a bureau of the U.S. Interior Department.  The budget proposal  also seeks to eliminate U.S. funding for critical tsunami-monitoring stations in oceans and reduce funds for a next-generation weather forecasting system.  Scientists said the loss of federal funding would derail the early warning system, which officials hope could one day send public earthquake alerts to smartphones seconds or minutes before a temblor.  “It probably would kill the early warning system if we thought there were no more funding coming from the U.S. Geological Survey,” said John Vidale, director of the Pacific Northwest Seismic Network and a seismology professor at the University of Washington. “The money we’ve received is essential,” he said.  In a statement announcing the USGS budget, the Department of the Interior said the budget “focuses on core USGS science and efficiency,” and asserted the budget would be able to pay for monitoring of the nation’s earthquakes. But the budget document posted on the U.S. Department of Interior’s website did not elaborate on the reason for cutting the alert system, saying only: “This elimination would end USGS efforts to implement the ShakeAlert earthquake early warning system.”  Besides more seismic sensors across the three states, the  system  needs a staff of 40 to 50 people to install and maintain equipment as well as monitor the computer systems.  Already, hiring has proved difficult. Since Trump was inaugurated, new hires for the network have not been approved. “There are people we’ve identified and interviewed and we’d like to hire them as soon as we have permission,” Vidale said. “These are the people who would keep the computer doing what we need to get the early warning system up and operating.”  Veteran seismologist Lucy Jones, who recently retired from the USGS, said she was disappointed. “Eliminating the $10 million (per) year that the government has been spending would stop the program and waste the $23 million that has already been invested,” she said in a statement.  Without funding, the ShakeAlert system would need to lay off employees, said Tom Heaton, a California Institute of Technology professor of engineering seismology.  “If that funding went away, we would have to lay off a number of the developers and the development would basically cease,” Heaton said. “I’m not sure how we could possibly recover from that.”  Such a blow would likely cause Heaton, who said he is nearing retirement, to work on other issues. “I’ve been kind of excited at the possibility we’ll have a system up and running by the time my career was done. That hope would be dashed in that case,” Heaton said.  Corporate interest  Companies have started to notice the potential benefits of an earthquake early warning system. Intel, for example, “is very eager to use early warning to make their manufacturing safer,” Vidale said.  Computer companies can use seconds of warning, before shaking comes, to halt sensitive manufacturing processes, preventing equipment from clanging together and being damaged in the shaking. That would enable factories to resume operations much faster after the earthquake.  Factories using toxic chemicals can prevent problems by securing operations before shaking arrives, too, Vidale said. And just telling people that shaking is coming, so that they can drop, cover and hold on, could save lives and reduce injuries. “This is a simple technology. We know how to do it,” Vidale said. “Even Mongolia is doing it.”  The budget proposal would also reduce $800,000 in funding for earthquake monitoring in Alaska and the central and eastern United States. Earthquakes are a risk on the East Coast, in the South and in the Midwest.  Under the proposal, an additional $561,000 would be cut from earthquake hazards operations, diminishing the government’s ability to monitor and report on earthquakes, assess earthquake hazards, and send earthquake results to emergency responders, the budget document said.  Rep. Adam Schiff, D-Calif.,   said in a Facebook post that the system should not be stopped just as it is being expanded after years of work to educate the public and Congress on its benefits. “Support for the early warning system in Congress is sustained, growing and bipartisan, and we will not accept this attempt by the president to cut a vital funding stream for a program that will protect life, property and critical infrastructure,” Schiff wrote.  U.S. already lagging  The United States is far behind other nations in developing an earthquake early warning system. In Japan, for instance, national TV broadcasts and cellphones are interrupted with warnings about incoming shaking, and for significant quakes, high-speed trains automatically slow down to reduce the threat of a deadly derailment.  “All of Japanese society is very happy for their early warning system. Nobody in Japan really wants to turn it off. They view it as a great step ahead for them. Californians will, too,” said Heaton, the professor.  In the past few years, lawmakers in Washington, D.C., and in Sacramento have started to devote significant dollars to developing the system.  The early warning system works on a simple principle: The shaking from an earthquake travels at about the speed of sound through rock, slower than the speed of today’s communications systems. That means it would take more than a minute for, say, a magnitude 7.8 earthquake that starts at the Salton Sea to shake up Los Angeles, 150 miles away, traveling on the state’s longest fault, the San Andreas.  The prototype system has had some early successes. When a magnitude 6.0 earthquake hit Napa, California, in 2014, the system gave researchers in San Francisco about eight seconds of warning before shaking began. Last year, 30 seconds of warning reached downtown Los Angeles before the ground shook from a magnitude 4.4 quake centered near Banning.  Eventually, bigger benefits are expected: technology to open elevators at the next floor, sparing occupants from being trapped, and warnings that could halt the flow of natural gas through major pipelines, preventing catastrophic fires.  Tsunami sensors  The proposed budget also would affect other agencies that monitor natural disasters. The U.S. Department of Commerce, which oversees the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA), faces elimination of  $12 million in funding   that pays for a critical network of buoys in the Pacific and Atlantic oceans, the Caribbean Sea and Gulf of Mexico. The network can sense an incoming tsunami, enabling officials to send out warnings.  The program is known as the Deep-Ocean Assessment and Reporting of Tsunamis, or DART. A budget document said its termination “is anticipated to have a 20 percent or greater impact on the accuracy, certainty, and timeliness of NOAA’s tsunami watches and warnings.”  The DART buoys are essential for telling local authorities whether the public needs to be evacuated from the coast, Vidale said. “Those DART buoys are our eyes out in the sea for incoming tsunamis from distant earthquakes.”  “The zeroing out of the DART buoys is just startling,” said University of Washington atmospheric sciences professor Cliff Mass.  The agency also faces a proposed reduction of funding for a network of automated weather stations, called Mesonet, that can indicate rapidly deteriorating conditions. That means NOAA would be unable to monitor such weather conditions in all 50 states, but would have to “prioritize states most susceptible to tornadoes and severe weather.”  The budget also proposes reduced funding for an array of sensors in the ocean designed to detect El Niño, which officials said might delay the recognition of the onset of weather phenomenon and hamper efforts to deal with its effects, such as heavy rain or drought.  The budget proposal also would slow development of the National Weather Service’s next-generation weather-forecasting system. Scientists and officials have been pushing for a major upgrade to the system, which is well behind European modeling systems, Mass said.  “What they’re proposing to do is cutting a large amount of money out, which would delay it at best and kill it at worst,” Mass said. “If you look at the statistics for virtually any place in the country, you’ll see the American model is well behind.”  “It probably would kill the early warning system if we thought there were no more funding coming ...  It probably would kill the early warning system if we thought there were no more funding coming ...  John Vidale, UW seismology professor  Pacific Northwest Seismic NetworkMemo:  Material from The Associated Press is included in this report.
